Discrete Applied Mathematics 40 (1992) 83- 104 North-Holland 83 A Manhattan channel router with good theoretical and practical performance Charlotte Wieners-Lummer Fachbereich 17, University of Paderborn, D-4790 Puderborn, Germany Received 10 July 1989 Revised 2 July 1990 Abstract Wieners-Lummer, C., A Manhattan channel router with good theoretical and practical performance, Discrete Applied Mathematics 40 (1992) 83-104. Manhattan channel routing is attractive for practical applications in VLSI layout design. Because of its theoretical complexity no efficient algorithms that yield the optimum channel width can be expected to exist for the general case. Based on two lower bounds for channel width called density andflux Baker, Bhatt, and Leighton have designed an approximation algorithm that routes each two-terminal net problem with density d and Auxfin a channel of width d + 0 (f) and each multiterminal net problem in a channel consisting of at most 2d + 0 (f) tracks. Several properties of that algorithm stand in the way of its immediate practical application. In contrast, good practical algorithms come additively within one or two of the density fairly often, but they have a terrible theoretical performance. We present a new method for Manhattan routing, that approximates the optimum channel width to within a constant factor, but is superior to the method of Baker, Bhatt and Leighton with respect to the constant factor, the running-time, the number of generated jogs and the typical number of tracks used. Moreover, it can be adjusted to the practical structure of a channel. In this sense our approximation algorithm is practical. Keywords. Approximation algorithm, channel router, Manhattan model, VLSI. 1. Introduction Channel routing plays an important role in the automated design of integrated circuits. After the placement and global routing phases, the channel router is usually invoked to complete final interconnections. Most routers assume an underlying Correspondence IO; Professor C. Wieners-Lummer, Fachbereich 17, University of Paderborn, D-4790 Pa- derborn, Germany. 0166-218X/92/$05.00 0 1992 - Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved

84 C. Wieners-Lummer integer grid of horizontal tracks (numbered from bottom to top) and vertical columns (numbered from left to right). Special grid-points on the highest track (top- track) and special grid-points on the lowest track (bottom-track) are terminals. The terminals are partitioned into n sets of cardinality 22. Sets of cardinality p are called p-terminal nets. Sets of an arbitrary cardinality are also called multiterminal nets. Top-to-bottom nets are two-terminal nets having one terminal on the top- and one terminal on the bottom-track. The number of terminals is denoted by t. The leftmost terminal of a net is called the beginning-terminal, the rightmost terminal is called the ending-terminal and every other terminal is called a middle-terminal. W.1.o.g. we may assume that no column of the channel contains two terminals belonging to the same two-terminal net [9]. A solution of the channel routing problem is a set of subgraphs of the grid (called wires) such that the terminals of each net are connected by a wire under the condition of the corresponding routing model. The goal of a channel router is to complete the routing in as few tracks as possible. The number of tracks on which nets are routed in a given layout is called its channel width. Since channel routers perform detailed routing, they are very much dependent on the design rules. The routing model reflects different technological constraints, and at the same time serves to structure the domain of solutions for the routing algorithm. The Manhattan model is one of the most practical routing models due to its trivial layer assignment. In Manhattan routing different wires have to be embedded edge disjointly. They are allowed to cross, but without creating knock- knees in any grid-point (i.e., if two different wires run through the same grid-point, they do not bend in that grid-point). If knock-knees are also allowed in the layout we call the routing model the knock-knee model. Thus the knock-knee model is the edge disjoint routing model. After the Manhattan routing phase, the layout can be physically routed on two layers by assigning the vertical wires onto the top-layer and the horizontal wires onto the bottom-layer. Contact-cuts (called vias) connect wires on different layers. Usually, contact-cuts introduce electrical instabilities (due to the layer displacement) or increase the delay along the wire. Also bends and branchings of a wire (called jogs) have adverse effects on the delay and other electrical properties (due to reflections). Since jogs in a Manhattan layout correspond to vias in the 2-layer- layout, the number of jogs per wire in the Manhattan layout is an important measure of practicability. Density and flux are lower bounds for the minimal number of tracks used for Manhattan routing in a channel: The local density d, of a Manhattan routing problem is the number of nets that has to go across any vertical cut between the columns C and C+ 1 of the channel. (A net has to go across a cut if its left terminal is to the left and its right terminal is to the right of the cut.) The density d is the maximal local density in the channel. Clearly, the density d is also a lower bound in the case of knock-knee routing. To give an intuitive idea of the flux we briefly outline the proof of its lower

A Manhattan channel router 85 bound. Suppose that on the top-track, x consecutive grid-points exist, that belong to x-y different nets, each containing at least one terminal out of the x grid-points. We study those nets while routing them trackwise from top to bottom. Since no net is trivial, each of the x-y nets has to change its column. Since knock-knees are not allowed, nets may only go into free columns, where a free column is one that is cur- rently not occupied by another net. Thus, at most y + 2 nets can bend on the highest track of the channel, while at most two of them are routed into columns to the left respectively right of the x grid-points. Since the routing on the highest track generates at most two additional free columns, on the second highest track at most y + 4 nets can move to another column. An iteration of the argument proves that on the following tracks at most y + 6, y + 8, y + 10, . . . nets may bend. Consequently, the fluxf is a lower bound on the channel width supposed that f is the minimal w that fulfills the following inequality for each sequence of x consecutive grid-points where-on the top- or bottom-track-terminals of x-y pairwise distinct nets exist, each having at least one terminal out of the x grid-points [7]: x-y5 2 (y+2i)=yw+ w(w+ 1). 1=l Our definition of flux differs from that given in [ 1,2,5], It provides a lower bound that is tighter by a constant factor. Experimental results have shown, that in practice most channels can be routed in d + O(1) tracks (e.g. [lo]). They often have several free grid-points (grid-points without terminals) distributed among the channel and their flux is dominated by the density. On the other hand problem instances are known, where the flux is the dominating lower bound. For example, consider the n-shift-right-l problem with n top-to-bottom nets, where the top-terminal of each net is located one column to the left of its bottom-terminal (see Fig. 1). The problem has density 1 and flux rfil. Manhattan channel routing, especially the routing of two-terminal nets, is known 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1415 16 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910111213141516 Fig. I. The 16.shift-right-l problem and a trivial solution on 16 tracks

86 C. Wieners-Lummer to be NP-complete [12]. Recently, it has been shown that even knock-knee channel routing is NP-complete [ll]. [l] have developed an approximation algorithm for Manhattan routing that routes each channel containing two-terminal nets in at most d + O(f) and multiterminal nets in at most 2d + O(f) tracks. The algorithm routes the channel in four phases. Figure 2 describes the regions that the different phases route. In the first two phases the free grid-points of the top- and bottom-tracks are distributed uniformly such that the remaining channel can be partitioned into blocks of k consecutive columns each containing at least three free grid-points on both the top- and the bottom-track. Using the free grid-points Phase 3 routes the different blocks in such a way, that each net is connected with the top- or bottom-track of a block B, exactly if it has a terminal in B on the same track. Thus, Phase 3 does not take into account which column the terminals of block B are located in. Finally, Phase 4 routes the terminals within each block into their correct columns. The flux f enables the block-size k and therefore the number of tracks used in Phases 1, 2 and 4 to be bounded by O(f). To get an intuitive idea of the proceeding in different phases, consider the n-shift- right-l problem with flux f = [fil. As Fig. 1 indicates, a trivial solution would imply a channel width of n tracks. However, if we partition the channel into blocks of size k = rfi 1 and route each kth net on the topmost and bottommost tracks of the channel into the free columns of the channel (see Fig. 3), we distribute like Phases 1 and 2 the free grid-points on m/k) + O(1) tracks. Phase 3 has a trivial solution, since the terminals of each net are located in the same block and thus can be vertically routed. Since Phase 4 completes the routing on additional k - 1 tracks, we have generated a 2fi + O(l)-solution, that is twice the lower bound f. (The solu- tion is even within a factor of l/z optimal, since f2=- 1 is a lower bound for the n-shift-right-l problem [3].) An evaluation of the constant factor in O(f) shows that the algorithm of [l] creates channels of width d + r49.55. f 1-t O(1) in the case of top-to-bottom nets respectively channels of width 2d + r89.18. f 1 + O( 1) in the general case. These ap- proximation factors make the method unattractive in practice. The running-time of the algorithm can be as large as O(t(d + f)) because of the relative complicate data structure used in Phase 3. The number of jogs generated while routing amounts to Phase 1, 2 II;;;; Phase 1, 2 Fig. 2. The regions routed in each phase.

A Manhattan channel router 87 block block block block nnnn 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Phase 4 Phase3 II III III III III II Phase4 II III III Ill III II Phase 1,2l+m, 1 1 I Jj-++ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Fig. 3. A 4-phase solution of the 16-shift-right-l problem on seven tracks. O(t) but some nets, even two-terminal nets, may have O(d +f) jogs. Moreover, no justification is known that the inclusion of practical heuristics will make the strategy of [l] efficient for practical application. In general, the essential work of the approximation algorithm is done in Phase 3. (Phase 3 is not necessary for the solution of the n-shift-right-l problem due to its regular structure.) Thus, the practicability of the 4-phase approach depends strictly on the inter-block routing actions. For this reason we developed a new inter- block routing strategy, that is based on the efficient knock-knee router of [9] and that is compatible with the greedy strategy of [lo] at the same time. Like the inter- block routing method of [l], our strategy leads to an approximation algorithm for Manhattan channel routing. However, our approximation algorithm is a practical router: The inclusion of the greedy heuristics of [lo] reduces the channel width generated in Phase 3 from 2d + O(f) to d + O(1) in almost all practical cases and most channels can be routed by the new inter-block routing phase-without perfor- ming Phases 1, 2 and 4. In addition to its practicability, our approximation algorithm has a better theoretical performance than the method of [l]: The new inter-block routing routine needs only two free grid-points on the top- and bottom-tracks of each block. Thus, the size of the blocks and therefore the number of tracks used in Phases 1, 2 and 4 are reduced. Our modified algorithms for performing Phases 1 and 4 lead to a fur- ther reduction of the constant factors in f. Since our inter-block routing method cor- rectly routes at least a half respectively a quarter of the terminals, the number of tracks typically used in Phase 4 is often less than its upper bound. Altogether our approximation algorithm creates channels of width at most d + r13.95. f 1 + O(1) respectively 2d + r17.65. f 1 + 0( 1). The running-time is O(t log f ). The number of jogs generated for each p-terminal net amounts to O(p). The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we describe the new inter-block routing routine for top-to-bottom nets. In Section 3 we outline the algorithm for

88 C. Wieners-Lummer the general case and Section 4 presents the approximation algorithm. In Section 5 we show the practicability of our method and state computational data comparing the approximation algorithm to greedy solutions. In Section 6 we give conclusions. 2. Inter-block routing of top-to-bottom nets Assuming that the channel consists of top-to-bottom nets the objective of inter- block routing is the following: Input: A channel divided into blocks of k consecutive columns each such that the following properties hold: l The terminals of every net are located in different blocks. l The first two columns of every block containing the ending-terminal of a net on the top-track have no terminal on the bottom-track. l The first two columns of every block containing the ending-terminal of a net on the bottom-track have no terminal on the top-track. Problem: Permute the ending-terminals of each block on the top-track and the ending-terminals of each block on the bottom-track such that the resulting channel is routable in at most d+4 tracks and construct such a routing. Note that the permutation moves no ending-terminal from one block to another one and that the inter-block routing does not move the beginning-terminals. Since for each net its two terminals are located in different blocks, the permutation of the ending-terminals does not change the density of the original channel routing problem. The inter-block routing algorithm routes the channel columnwise from left to right and determines the permutation of the ending-terminals at the same time. In each column the algorithm stops, permutes the ending-terminals, that are located within respectively to the right of the current column within the current block, and performs a layout action. The nets, that are coming into the current column from left are partitioned into active and extended nets. Nets are active in columns between their beginning- and their ending-terminal. Extended nets have both terminals to the left of the current column, but still occupy tracks in the current column [9]. For the set of extended nets we will maintain the following invariant: EXNET. Each extended net occupies exactly two tracks. The set of extended nets is partitioned into g groups G,, . . . , l Let N”’ G, such that the following properties hold: , , . . . , NLt) be the nets of group Gi and let NJ”’ be routed on top-track .sy)r and on bottom-track 0, such that $:>$‘b ’ ’ and s!” >$I, I. Then the following J>[ inequalities hold for all 1 <j<,;:

A Manhattan channel router 89 l There exist 2g unoccupied tracks frCi), j$‘, 1 I i 5 g. Both tracks dCi), fji) are associated with group Gi and the following inequalities hold: free . .. . . ..**. ** ._......_.._ .. . .. .. . net net net net net net 1 free ~ ......_ ........._ .............. Fig. 4. Some group of extended nets. Figure 4 gives an example of a group of extended nets. The object of the invariant EXNET is to guarantee that every column containing two beginning-terminals can be successfully routed: The two beginning nets use the free tracks of an arbitrary group and simultaneously the outermost extended net of the same group is closed (see Fig. 5). In fact, the routing of some block B may reduce every existing group of extended nets and at most one group of extended nets can be created. Thus dif- ferent nets, that are extended in the same block belong to the same group of extend- ed nets. Before routing the first column of some block B respectively after routing the last column of B we maintain the following invariant for the set of active and extended nets: BLOCK. l The invariant EXNET of the extended nets is maintained. l Active nets use one track. beginning net I free nel 1 net 2 net 3 net 3 net 2 net 1 free ...\_\_. . ..I .-......-_.\__... _. free 1 net 2 t net 3 --I ....~..._ ........-_.\_. -----I net 3 net 2 free beginning net Fig. 5. Routing two beginning-terminals.

C. Wieners-Lummer l Assuming that a = #active nets, e = # extended nets, g = #groups of extended nets, the following inequality holds: a+2e+2gId+2. For routing block B we partition its tracks into three classes: l occupied tracks on which nets are routed, l reserved tracks that are reserved for specific routing actions, l and the remaining free tracks. In the first column of block B, there are occupied and free tracks, but no reserved tracks. Reserved tracks that still exist at the end of B are becoming free tracks. Thus, reserved tracks exist inside of B only. Their number never exceeds four. The reserv- ed tracks fulfill the following invariant: RESERV. l Suppose that i columns of B have been routed, in which an ending-terminal is located on the top-track. Then there are min(2,i) reserved tracks that are located below each net ending on the top-track of B within respectively to the right of the current column. l Suppose that j columns of R have been routed, in which an ending-terminal is located on the bottom-track. Then there are min(2,j) reserved tracks that are located above each net ending on the bottom-track of B within respectively to the right of the current column. l No other reserved tracks exist. The object of the invariant RESERV is to guarantee that each column containing one beginning- and one ending-terminal can be successfully routed. Moreover, it enables maintaining the invariant EXNET. Now we can formulate the invariant, on which the routing of the current column in block B is based: INV. l RESERV is maintained. l The set of extended nets generated in blocks to the left of B complies with the invariant EXNET. l The set of extended nets generated in B together with the two outermost reserv- ed tracks (as free tracks) complies with the invariant EXNET. l Active nets use one track.

A Manhattan channel router 91 l Assuming that a = #active nets, e= #extended nets, g = #groups of extended nets generated in blocks to the left of B, r = #reserved tracks, the following inequality holds: (1) Note that the validity of BLOCK results in the validity of INV before routing B, since r equals 0. The validity of BLOCK after routing B follows from the validity of INV and the fact that 722 holds, if some group of extended nets has been generated in B. Furthermore, the invariant implies that at most d +4 tracks are used. It remains to describe the permutation of the ending-terminals and the routing ac- tions in the current column. To describe the permutation we call active nets whose ending-terminal is located within respectively to the right of the current column on the top-track of B upper-ending nets, and active nets whose ending-terminal is located within respectively to the right of the current column on the bottom-track of B lower-ending nets. The routing actions in the current column extend active nets, that have no terminal in the current column by one unit into the next column. The same holds for extended nets that are not closed in the current column. If no ter- minal is contained in the current column, all wires do not change any track in the current column. Thus we may assume that the current column contains at least one terminal. We use a respectively a’ to denote the number of active nets before respec- tively after the current column, similarly for e, g, r. Case 1: The column contains one of the first two ending-terminals on the top- (bottom)-track. Since the channel is an instance of the inter-block routing problem we are sure that the column contains one terminal only. We close the lowest (highest) upper- ending (lower-ending) net and change its track into a reserved track. Routing the highest (lowest) ending net implies, that RESERV is maintained. Since a’=a- 1, e’=e, g’=g and r’= r+ 1, inequality (1) and therefore INV holds. lowest upper-ending \_I . . .. .. .. . reserved Case 2: The column contains two ending-terminals. If some upper-ending net is located above some lower-ending net, we close both

92 C. Wieners-Lummer nets and change their tracks into free tracks. Invariant upper-ending _l .**...... free lower-ending --I .**...-.. free INV trivially holds. Otherwise, every lower-ending net is located above every upper-ending net. Further- more, there exist four reserved tracks validating the invariant RESERV. We close the lowest upper-ending net N and change the topmost lower-ending net N’ into an extended net by routing N’ onto the second lowest reserved track. The track that N used before is changed into a reserved track. The invariant RESERV is maintain- ed, since N is the lowest of the upper-ending nets. The lower wire of each net- extended to the right of the current column-will be routed onto a track located above the lower wire of net N’ (due to the choice of N). The upper wire of each net-extended to the right of the current column-will be located below the upper wire of net N’ (due to the choice of N’). Thus the set of extended nets generated in B together with the two outermost reserved tracks complies with the invariant EXNET. Since a’= II - 2, e’= e+ 1 and r’= r, inequality (1) and therefore INV holds. reserved reserved highest lower-ending N’ lowest upper-ending N reserved reserved Case 3: The column contains one ending-terminal on the top-track, one begin- ning-terminal on the bottom-track. We close the lowest of the upper-ending nets N. Below N there exist two reserved tracks. We use the upper of the two reserved tracks for the beginning net. The track that N used before is changed into a reserved track. Due to the choice of N, the invariant RESERV is maintained. The equalities a’= a, e’= e, g’= g and r’= r imply the validity of INV. -I $Fee;\2pper-ending N ......... ._\*.. reserved reserved ......... .......... I- rese,,,ed Case 4. The column contains one ending-terminal on the bottom-track, one beginning-terminal on the top-track. Analogously to Case 3.

A Manhattan channel router 93 Case 5: The column contains two beginning-terminals, and there exist extended nets generated in some blocks to the left of B. The outermost extended net N of some group is closed. The free tracks belonging to that group are used for the two beginning nets. The two tracks that N used before are changed into free tracks that are associated with the group of extended nets that N belonged to (see Fig. 5). Thus, EXNET is maintained and due to a’=a+ 2, e’= e - 1, g’lg and r’= r the invariant INV is valid. Case 6: The column contains two beginning-terminals, and there exist extended nets. Every extended net is generated in B. The outermost extended net N is closed. The two outermost reserved tracks are used for the two beginning nets. The two tracks that N used before are changed into reserved tracks. The reduced group of extended nets together with the two outer- most reserved tracks complies with the invariant EXNET. The invariant RESERV is maintained, because the remaining upper- respectively lower-ending nets are located above respectively below the lower respectively upper segment of net N. In- variant INV is valid due to a’= a + 2, e’= e - 1, g’=g and r’= r. reserved ......... reserved .................... reserved \_\*_._.\* reserved W”P (Z reserved ................... reserved ......... reserved reserved ......... l- Case 7: The column contains two beginning-terminals, and there exist no extend- ed nets. Now, every net is active and uses exactly one track. Thus a Ed - 2. Since e = g = 0, the inequality a+ 2e-t 2g+ rsd- 2+r holds. Since t-14 and d+4 tracks are available, at least two tracks are free. We use those tracks for the beginning nets. Clearly, the invariant INV is maintained. free .........I- free ......... r - Case 8: The column contains one terminal only that is not one of the first two ending-terminals on the top- (bottom-)track in B. Analogously to one of the Cases 2-7. While routing block B with tB terminals at most O(t,) tracks have to be con-

94 C. Wieners-Lummer sidered, since nets having no terminal in block B are routed through B without changing any track. The search for some lowest respectively highest track can be performed in time O(log ts) per column. Therefore, the routing of B proceeds in time O(tBlog ts). Since tB=O(k) the channel is inter-block routed in time O(t log k). The number of jogs generated for some net is bounded by four, especially every net that never becomes extended is routed in two jogs. 3. Inter-block routing of multiterminal nets We formulate the inter-block routing problem for multiterminal nets as follows: Input: A channel divided into blocks of k consecutive columns each such that the following properties hold: l The terminals of every net are located in different blocks. l The first two grid-points on the top-track and the first two grid-points on the bottom-track of every block are free. Problem: Permute the terminals of each block on the top-track and the terminals of each block on the bottom-track such that the resulting channel is routable in at most 2d + 4 tracks and construct such a routing. Basically, the inter-block routing of multiterminal nets is a combination of the method for top-to-bottom nets and the algorithm of [9] that routes channels with multiterminal nets in knock-knee mode in at most 2d- 1 tracks. Applying the in- variants of Section 2 we modify the algorithm of [9] in such a way that knock-knees are avoided. In [9] active nets may use more than one track. We handle active nets, that are routed on at least three tracks like extended nets. Thus we call them quasi-extended nets. The invariant EXNET is modified into the invariant: MULTIEXNET. The set of extended or quasi-extended nets is partitioned into g groups Gr, . . . , Gg such that the following properties hold: l Let @,...,N(,:) be th e nets of group Gi. Let sy\ be the highest track, on which I$” is routed, and let sjlb be the lowest track occupied by IV:‘, such that $’ > $) J.t J>b and s(i) > $ 1 f. Then the following inequalities hold for all 1 sj < Iii: Jst > s!i’>s~~l,t>s~‘l,,b>SJ(j)b. J.f l There exist 2g unoccupied tracks ftci), fd”, 1 (r isg. Both tracks ft@), fb(i’ are associated with group Gi and the following inequalities hold: f (0 , $jt, $Ob , fb(i) . t , . Accordingly, the invariant BLOCK is modified into the invariant:

A Manhattan channel router 95 MULTIBLOCK. l The invariant MULTIEXNET is maintained. l Assuming that t= #tracks on which nets are routed, g= #groups, the following inequality holds: t+2gs2d+2. Nets that are routed on one track at the beginning of block B and that have some middle-terminal in B are handled like beginning nets. We call them quasi-beginning in 8. Middle-terminals of quasi-beginning nets are called quasi-beginning-terminals. Note that the notation quasi-beginning depends on the routing of the columns to the left of block B. Maintaining the invariant MULTIEXNET guarantees that every column containing two beginning- or quasi-beginning-terminals can be successfully routed if some extended or quasi-extended net exists: The beginning respectively quasi-beginning nets can be routed onto the free tracks of some group. Simulta- neously, the outermost extended respectively quasi-extended net of the group is closed respectively reduced to one of its middle-tracks. At least two tracks are made free and the invariant MULTIEXNET can be maintained (see Fig. 6). Nets that are routed on at least two tracks at the beginning of block B and that have some middle-terminal in B are handled like ending nets. We call those middle- terminals quasi-ending-terminals. Nets having some quasi-ending-terminal in B are called quasi-ending in B. Accordingly, the invariant RESERV is changed into MULTIRESERV and INV is modified to MULTIINV: MULTIRESERV. l Suppose that i (j) columns of B have been routed, in which an ending- or quasi- ending-terminal is located on the top-track (bottom-track). Then there are min(2, i) beginning net free . .._. . . . . I net 1 free net 2 net 2 net 3 net 3 net 1 net 3 net 4 net net 2 net 2 net 1 l.............. _ \_...... free free . . “..“‘, ~ beginning net Fig. 6. Routing two beginning or quasi-beginning nets

96 C. Wieners-Lummer (min(2,j)) reserved tracks that are located below (above) each net ending respective- ly quasi-ending on the top-track (bottom-track) of B within respectively to the right of the current column. l No other reserved tracks exist. MULTIINV. l MULTIRESERV is maintained. l The set of extended respectively quasi-extended nets generated in blocks to the left of B and the set of extended respectively quasi-extended nets generated in B together with the two outermost reserved tracks (as free tracks) complies with the invariant MULTIEXNET. l Assuming that t = #tracks on which nets are routed, g = #groups of (quasi-)extended nets generated to the left of B, r = #reserved tracks, the following inequality holds: t+2g+r52d+max(2,r). quasi-ending -c + . . . . . . . . . reserved Fig. 7. Generating reserved tracks. The position of the two free grid-points on the top- respectively bottom-track of B is modified in such a way that they are in one column with the first two ending- or quasi-ending-terminals on the bottom- respectively top-track. Routing those four columns generates the four reserved tracks (see Fig. 7). According to the routing of top-to-bottom nets we always route the ending respectively quasi-ending nets that quasi-ending reserved reserved & ..--.- .. free .........rese,,,ed ......... ................... r reserved Fig. 8. Routing quasi-ending nets.

A Manhattan channel router 91 presently occupy the lowest respectively highest track depending on the track (top respectively bottom) the net has to be connected with. Columns having one ending- respectively quasi-ending-terminal and one begin- ning- respectively quasi-beginning-terminal can be successfully routed since the quasi-ending & . ..._._. quasi-extended . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . r Fig. 9. Generating quasi-extended nets. beginning or quasi-beginning net can be routed onto one of the reserved tracks. All tracks of some ending respectively quasi-ending net are connected with the terminal in B. One track can be changed into a reserved track (see Fig. 8). In columns having two ending- respectively quasi-ending-terminal where every upper-ending respectively quasi-ending net is routed on tracks below the lower- ending respectively quasi-ending nets, an extended respectively quasi-extended net has to be generated (see Fig. 9). While inter-block routing, the position of beginning- or quasi-beginning-ter- minals is never modified (apart from the terminals exchanged for the four free grid- points). The first middle-terminal of every net is quasi-beginning. Each middle-ter- minal on the top-track is either quasi-beginning or the routing of its column causes the next middle-terminal to be quasi-beginning. Making that track to the top-track of the channel with the most middle-terminals shows that at least a quarter of the middle-terminals are quasi-beginning. Therefore, at least a quarter of the middle- terminals and all beginning-terminals are correctly routed. The position of the other terminals may be changed within some block. The permutation of the ending- respectively quasi-ending-terminals may increase the density from d to d’, if quasi-ending-terminals are located to the left of ending- terminals. Nevertheless, the channel is inter-block routed in 2d +4 tracks: Each column containing at least one ending- respectively quasi-ending-terminal or an ex- tended respectively quasi-extended net is routed in as many tracks as the previous column. If the local density dc is at most d, the routing of column C is also com- pleted in 2d + 4 tracks, since at most four reserved tracks exist and each active net is routed on at most two tracks. Thus let us consider the first column C of B, where the local density d, exceeds d and no extended respectively quasi-extended net exists. The growing of the density by one is caused by locating an ending-terminal to the right of C and a quasi-ending-terminal to the left of C. To the right of column C the net of the quasi-ending-terminal is routed on exactly one track. Within B we

98 C. Wieners-Lummer pair the net of the quasi-ending-terminal and the net beginning in column C and in- terpret the pair as one active net routed on two tracks. Thus, at most d active nets exist between column C and C+ 1. Pairing the nets in the remaining columns of B accordingly proves the upper bound of 2d + 4 tracks. The running-time of our algorithm amounts to O(t log k). The number of generated jogs per p-terminal net is at most 2p. 4. An approximation algorithm Phases 1, 2 and 4 of our approximation algorithm are similar to [l], but we modified Phases 1 and 4 to reduce the constant factors in f. Phase 3 is based on our inter-block routing. Given a real positive constant c the approximation algo- rithm proceeds as follows. Phase 1: Partitioning the channel into superblocks. We determine s integers r,, 15 its, such that the channel can be partitioned into s superblocks of rcr,lr, consecutive columns each with at most rcrjlri- rcr;l ter- minals on both the top- and bottom-track fulfilling the following properties: (1) The nets of the top-terminals (bottom-terminals) of each superblock are pair- wise disjoint. (2) Every top-terminal (bottom-terminal) belongs to a net that has at least one ter- minal outside the superblock or on the bottom-side (top-side) of the channel. The definition of the flux f implies, that in each possible subdivision into superblocks the size of ri is at most Q := r(k’m + l/2) f 1+ 1. For, suppose that ri>e. Then there exists a sequence of x:= rcele consecutive grid-points on the top- or bottom-track with at least x-y := rc@l@ - rcQl + 1 terminals, that fulfill the properties (1) and (2). The definition off implies that yf + f (f + 1)2x-y holds. Substituting x and y leads to a contradiction. The partitioning into superblocks can be computed by sweeping the channel from left to right and finishing each superblock as soon as possible. Since the computa- tion of some superblock S having ts terminals needs time at most O(t, log t,), Phase 1 can be performed in time O(t . maxIli5,(log(crf))) = O(t log f). Phase 2: Modifying the channel into an instance of the inter-block routing problem. Each superblock of size rcrilri has at least rcril grid-points on the top- respec- tively bottom-track, that are free grid-points or contain terminals, whose nets have an additional terminal within the top- respectively bottom-track of the same superblock. We connect terminals of identical nets on the topmost respectively bot- tommost tracks of the superblock, such that the top- respectively bottom-track of the middle section of each superblock contains at least rcril free grid-points. The routing can be performed independently for each superblock by sharing at most

A Manhattan channel router 99 2rcr,,.J tracks (rmax := maxr 5 ;\_ri). The modification is unnecessary in the case of routing top-to-bottom nets. Now we partition the superblock into rcrij subblocks of size T;. For distributing the free grid-points among the superblock, we route the terminals from the first col- umn of each subblock into the rcr;l empty grid-points on the topmost respectively bottommost tracks of the superblock. The density of the resulting channel cannot exceed d + 2 rcr,,, 1 and the modification needs at most 2rcr,,,l tracks. Next we partition the channel into blocks of k12r,,, consecutive columns by combining pairs of subblocks. Every block contains at least two free grid-points on both the top- and bottom-track. By routing at most four terminals into the free grid- points of each block, we can position the free grid-points appropriately. The density of the resulting channel is increased by at most four. Finally, within each block we pick one representative top- respectively bottom- terminal for each net having terminals on the top- respectively bottom-track of the same block and replace the remaining terminals by free grid-points (the replaced ter- minals will be routed in Phase 4). Now every net has at most one top- and at most one bottom-terminal in each block. Nets having one top- and one bottom-terminal in the same block B are called vertical in B. Defining the inter-block routing problem we did assume that the terminals of each net are located in different blocks, but our method can be extended to handle vertical nets: Every net that is vertical in some block B is routed in B by locating its top- and its bottom-terminal into the same column and connecting the terminals vertically. Phase 3: Inter-block routing the channel. The inter-block routing can be performed using at most d-t 2rcrl + 8 tracks in the case of top-to-bottom nets and on at most 2(d + 2 rcrl + 4) + 4 tracks in the general case. Phase 4: Routing each block. The routing of the terminals replaced in Phase 2 and the terminals permuted in Phase 3 relies on a technique of [6]. Within each block B [l] use one track per net, where the ordering of the tracks is determined by the vertical constraint graph. The vertical constraint graph is a directed graph, whose vertices represent the nets. We draw an edge from Nr to N2, if there exists a column in B, in which the upper ter- minal belongs to net N,, and the lower to N,. To break a cycle in the vertical con- straint graph, one net of the cycle uses two tracks: The upper segment routes the top-terminals into a free column of B and the lower segment routes the bottom- terminals into the same column, where the two segments are vertically connected. Since all cycles are independent (due to Phase 2), the same empty column can be used by all cycles, if all the tracks for one cycle are consecutive. Since at most [k/21 cycles exist, the routing is completed in k+ [k/21 tracks on the top- respectively bottom-side of the channel. We reduce the number of tracks to k+ rk/41 + O(1) as follows. We route the ter- minals of the first and the last column of B into the free grid-points of B using the

100 C. Wieners-Lummer topmost respectively bottommost track of the two regions reserved for Phase 4. In the upper (lower) region of Phase 4 every net has at most one bottom-terminal (top- terminal) due to Phase 2. Thus we can break two cycles on three tracks by routing the lower (upper) segment of two nets on the same track into the left respectively right free column of block B. The upper (lower) segments are routed on one track each as before. Now the upper region of Phase 4 together with its lower region con- sist of at most [Sk/21 +0(l) tracks. In the case of routing top-to-bottom nets, the total number of tracks used by the approximation algorithm is at most d + 4 rcrmaxl + [Sk/21 + O(1) = d + 4 rumax + 5rmax +0(l). Substituting the upper bound for rmax and computing a value of c such that the factor in the flux term f is minimized (c= fm- 5) proves the upper bound of d + r13.95 .fl+ O(1) tracks. In the general case, the algorithm uses at most 2d + 8 rcrma,l + 5r,,, + O(1) tracks. An optimal c (c = 5/3 -ii%???) leads to the upper bound of 2d + 117.65 .fl +0(l) tracks. Phases 2 and 4 run in time O(t), and Phases 1 and 3 in time O(t logy). Thus the total run-time amounts to O(t logf). Since Phase 3 correctly routes many terminals and the inter-block routing of [l] may change the places of every terminal, the prob- ability that our algorithm uses as many tracks as given in the upper bound is less than the probability that the number of tracks used in the algorithm of [l] reaches its upper bound. Of course, in the worst case Phase 4 of our algorithm may use as many tracks as the upper bound specifies. The number of jogs per p-terminal net generated in Phases 2, 3 and 4 is O(p). Moreover, Phase 4 of our algorithm typically generates less jogs than Phase 4 of [I]. 5. A practical approximation algorithm We have presented a Manhattan channel routing approximation algorithm that is superior to the method of [l] with respect to theoretical and practical properties, but the present version continues to be unattractive in practice because of the high approximation factors. However, we found a way out by including the ideas of the greedy channel router [lo] into the approximation algorithm; the greedy router generates channels of width d + O(1) in most practical cases (due to experimental results), but has a terrible theoretical performance. The greedy router scans the channel columnwise from left to right. While routing a single column, the router first attempts to bring nets into the channel from the terminals on the top- respectively bottom-track with minimal vertical wire-length. If some split nets (extended nets or active nets routed on divers tracks) exist, the router second tries to free up as many tracks as possible by vertically routing on the presently unused vertical grid-edges. Third, the remaining split nets are brought together as close as possible. After that, active nets are routed such that they become closer to their next top- or bottom-connection. If needed, the channel is finally widen to bring in the infeasible connections of the top- respectively bottom-track.

A Manhattan channel router 101 Several strategies of the greedy method can be directly included into the approx- imation algorithm: It seems to be advantageous to free up as many tracks as possible in Phase 3. Routing nets closer to their next top- or bottom-connection prevents the splitting of nets and thus reduces the number of tracks used in Phase 3 from 2d + O(f) to d + O(f) in many practical cases. Furthermore, terminals only have to permute if the current column cannot be routed successfully, i.e., middle- respec- tively ending-terminals can’t be connected to the presently used tracks. Thus in many cases the number of tracks used in Phase 4 is reduced. However, the greedy heuristics can be performed only if the invariant MULTIEXNET is maintained. Thus we expect that those modifications alone won’t do. The next step to the practicability is based on the observation, that the routing actions performed in Phases 1, 2 and 4 are only necessary for maintaining the in- variant MULTIEXNET. For this reason we relax the invariant such that MULTIEXNET is maintained for all but at most a small number of nets. The (quasi-)extended nets, that do not comply with MULTIEXNET have to be routed on at most maxsplit additional split-tracks, where all tracks of (quasi-)extended nets are additional split-tracks, but the two bottommost tracks of a quasi-extended net are not. Clearly, our approximation algorithm together with the maxsplit-relaxed in- variant MULTIEXNET increases the channel width by at most maxsplit tracks. Thus, for each constant maxsplit the resulting algorithm approximates the optimal channel width. Since the relaxed invariant is valid as long as at most maxsplit addi- tional split-tracks exist, we can reformulate the algorithm as follows: Step 1. Route the channel columnwise as long as at most maxspfit additional split- tracks exist. Step 2. Reroute the current column by creating a superblock (Phase 1) and route the superblock by Phases 2, 3 and 4. Continue at Step 1. The value -1 for maxsplit prevents the above algorithm from routing in Step 1 and thus reproduces the router presented in Section 3. With maxsplit= w we rederive the practical greedy router, since the routing is completed within Step 1. However, the w-relaxation does not imply a good theoretical performance. Other maxspfit-values balance between a good practical and a good theoretical behavior. Thus our channel router can be adjusted to the specific structure of a channel by the parameter maxsplit. Experimental results of [lo] have shown, that there were never more than four split nets in their examples. Thus, choosing maxsplit =4 implies an algorithm with good theoretical performance and a good behavior in practice at the same time. Unfortunately, the greedy method is not free of weakness. The first weak point of the greedy method is that jogging is permitted to occur frequently. Thus a large number of vias is generated. This can be remedied with postprocessing (e.g. [13]). Second, the scan-direction from left to right tends to extend the channel on the right end, whereas the left end may contain free grid-edges. Here one possible solution is to start the routing in the middle of the channel respectively in some column with

102 C. Wieners-Lummer maximum density and to complete the routing to both sides. We have implemented modifications of the greedy strategy, that realize the idea of starting the routing pro- cess in the middle of the channel and our experimental results are promising: Deutsch’s difficult example [4] has become a common Manhattan channel routing benchmark; it is a channel routing problem with 174 columns, 72 nets and density 19. [lo] route the example in 20 tracks and 403 jogs [8]. Our modified approach routes the channel in 19 tracks and reduces the number of jogs to 326. At most two additional split-tracks exist in any column. Thus, while routing Deutsch’s difficult example the 4-relaxed approximation algorithm never executes Step 2. In contrast, the layout generated by the (-1)-relaxed approximation algorithm induces a channel width of 44 tracks. Note, that the greedy strategies cannot be included into the approximation algorithm of [l] due to a very restrictive order of the nets and the free tracks. Moreover, the new approximation algorithm can start the routing process in the middle of the channel, whereas the pyramid data structure in the algorithm of [I] prevents the router from starting in an arbitrary column of the channel. 6. Conclusions We have presented a new method for inter-block routing a channel in Manhattan mode that leads to an approximation algorithm that is superior to the known algorithms of [l] with respect to theoretical and practical properties. [5] have presented an approximation algorithm that routes each channel with multiterminal nets in [3d/21 + O(J/‘~) + O(f) tracks, thus reducing the constant factor in the density. Their algorithm proceeds by transforming a channel routing problem with density d and flux f into an extended simple channel routing problem (ESCRP) of density dE = [3d/21+ O(dm) + O(f) that is an instance of the inter-block routing problem with block-size k = O(f). Roughly spoken, an ESCRP is a channel where each multiterminal net is decomposed into simple nets, i.e., two- terminal nets and one-sided multiterminal nets. ESCRP’s can be inter-block routed on dE + O(1) tracks by an extension of the two-terminal net router of [ 11. In knock-knee mode ESCRP’s with density dE can be routed in dE tracks by an extension of the columnwise routing strategy of [9] ‘: The upper- respectively lower- sided multiterminal nets are routed from right to left on the topmost respectively bottommost tracks and the two-terminal nets are routed in the remaining middle region of the channel from left to right [14]. This knock-knee router can be extended to the Manhattan model by applying our invariants for inter-block routing. Thus, our inter-block routing method leads to a new approximation algorithm, that routes each channel in [3d/21+ O(lldlogd) + O(f) tracks. In contrast to the upper bound ’ The knock-knee routing algorithm of [S] works with switchbox-routing methods.

A Manhattan channel router 103 presented in [5], the constant factor in f lessens due to the reduced number of free grid-points and the reduced size of the blocks. The inter-block routing strategy of [l] induces a general framework for various routing models, that includes the knock-knee and the Manhattan model, the unit- vertical-overlap model, and multilayer routing with arbitrary overlap [2]. The algorithms based on the unified framework are tolerant to model changes and thus likely to practical applications. [2] suggest, that an improvement of a bound for any of the routing models will generalize to the other routing models. Their hope seems to be reasonable due to our new inter-block routing strategy: It can be extended to all routing models, that are included in the framework of [2] (the extension to the knock-knee model is already performed by [9]). At all times, we get results that are at least as good as those of [2] and often make practical applications possible. In this sense our inter-block routing strategy forms a new robust framework for theoretical and practical channel routing. Acknowledgement We would like to thank Thomas Lengauer for helpful discussions. A short version of the paper appeared in the Proceedings of the 1st Annual ACM/SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (1990). References [l] B.S. Baker, S.N. Bhatt and F.T. Leighton, An approximation algorithm for Manhattan routing, in: F.P. Preparata, ed., Advances in Computing Research Vol. 2, VLSI Theory (JAI Press, Green- wich, CT, 1984) 205-229. [2] B. Berger, M.L. Brady, D.J. Brown and F.T. Leighton, Nearly optimal bounds and algorithms for multilayer channel routing, Typescript (1986). [3] D.J. Brown and R.L. Rivest, New lower bounds for channel width, in: H.T. Kung, B. Sproull and G. Steele, eds., VLSI Systems and Computations (Computer Science Press, Rockville, MD, 1981) 178-185. [4] D.N. Deutsch, A “dogleg” channel router, in: Proceedings of the 9th Design Automation Con- ference (ACM, New York/IEEE Press, New York, 1976) 425-433. [5] S. Gao and M. Kaufmann, Channel routing of multiterminal nets, in: Proceedings of the 28th An- nual IEEE Symposium on Foundations in Computer Science (IEEE Press, New York, 1987) 316-325. [6] T. Kawamoto and Y. Kajitani, The minimum width routing of a 2-row 2-layer polycell-layout, in: Proceedings of the 16th Design Automation Conference (ACM, New York/IEEE Press, New York, 1979) 290-296. [7] T. Lengauer, Combinatorial algorithms for integrated circuit layout, in: Wiley-Teubner Series in Computer Science (Wiley, Chichester, 1990). [8] M.J. Lorenzetti and D.S. Baeder, Routing, in: B. Preas and M. Lorenzetti, eds., Physical Design Automation of VLSI Systems (Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, CA, 1988) 157-210. [9] K. Mehlhorn, F.P. Preparata and M. Sarrafzadeh, Channel routing in knock-knee mode: simplified algorithms and proofs, Algorithmica 1 (1986) 213-221.

104 C. Wieners-Lummer [lo] R.L. Rivest and C.M. Fiduccia, A “greedy” channel router, in: Proceedings of the 19th Design Automation Conference (ACM, New York/IEEE Press, New York, 1982) 418-424. [l I] M. Sarrafzadeh, Channel-routing problem in the knock-knee mode is NP-complete, IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design of Integr. Circuits and Systems (1987) 503-506. [12] T.G. Szymanski, Dogleg channel routing is NP-complete, IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design of Integr. Circuits and Systems 4 (1985) 31-41. [13] K.-S. The, D.F. Wong and J. Cong, Via minimization by layout modification, in: Proceedings of the 26th Design Automation Conference (ACM, New York/IEEE Press, New York, 1989) 799-802. [14] C. Wieners-Lummer, Improved algorithms for routing multiterminal nets, Typescript (1989).
