 Chalmers University of Technology University of Gothenburg Department of Computer Science and Engineering Göteborg, Sweden,  June 2012                     Visualisation of state machines using the Sugiyama framework Master of Science Thesis in Computer Science    VIKTOR MAZETTI HANNES SÖRENSSON  
 The Author grants to Chalmers University of Technology and University of Gothenburg  the non-exclusive right to publish the Work electronically and in a non-commercial purpose make it accessible on the Internet.  The Author warrants that he/she is the author to the Work, and warrants that the Work does not contain text, pictures or other material that violates copyright law.   The Author shall, when transferring the rights of the Work to a third party (for example a publisher or a company), acknowledge the third party about this agreement. If the Author has signed a copyright agreement with a third party regarding the Work, the Author warrants hereby that he/she has obtained any necessary permission from this third party to let Chalmers University of Technology and University of Gothenburg  store the Work electronically and make it accessible on the Internet.     Visualisation of state machines using the Sugiyama framework  VIKTOR MAZETTI HANNES SÖRENSSON  © VIKTOR MAZETTI, June 2012. © HANNES SÖRENSSON, June 2012.  Examiner: Peter Damaschke  Chalmers University of Technology University of Gothenburg Department of Computer Science and Engineering SE-412 96 Göteborg Sweden Telephone + 46 (0)31-772 1000   Cover: A layered graph where the vertices spell “Kozo Sugiyama Framework”.  Department of Computer Science and Engineering Göteborg, Sweden June 2012
AbstractIn this thesis a tool was developed to help Ericsson visualise state machines. In thisprocess an evaluation of graph layout algorithms within the Sugiyama framework, asuitable method for drawing state machine diagrams, was conducted. The frameworkconsists of four steps which are implemented and tested according to some chosencriteria for graph layouts. The steps are also tested in relation to each other so asto see if an algorithm used in one step can impact the quality of the solution forsubsequent steps.Interestingly enough we saw that a seemingly worse performing algorithm in one stepcould actually improve the quality of the next step.We discuss these results andsuggest that future work is needed to investigate if there are some properties of agraph that can indicate how well subsequent steps can perform.
AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank our supervisor at Ericsson, Tomas Nilsson, for his help and guid-ance throughout the project as well as our manager Gordon Sun for making our workthere possible.We would also like to thank our supervisor and examiner at Chalmers, Peter Damaschke,for theoretical guidance and for providing feedback on the report as it developed.
Contents1Introduction11.1 Background. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11.2 Purpose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11.3 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21.4 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21.5 Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .32Theory42.1 The state machine framework. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .42.2 Graph deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .52.3 Criteria for good graph layouts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .52.4 The Sugiyama framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .62.4.1 Cycle removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .72.4.2 Layer assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .82.4.3 Vertex ordering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .92.4.4 Coordinate assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .102.5 Alternative solutions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .112.5.1 Force-directed algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .112.5.2 Orthogonal layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .122.6 Linear Programming. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .133State Machine Visualisation plugin143.1 Parsing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .143.2 User interface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .153.3 Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .164Layout implementations174.1 Cycle removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .174.1.1 A simple heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .174.1.2 An enhanced greedy heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .184.1.3 Depth-ﬁrst search. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .184.1.4 LP formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .194.2 Layer assignment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .204.2.1 Longest path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .204.2.2 Coﬀman-Graham . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .214.2.3 LP formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .224.3 Vertex ordering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .224.3.1 Barycenter and Median . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .224.3.2 LP formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .254.4 Coordinate assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .264.4.1 Priority method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .264.4.2 LP formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
5Evaluation of implementations285.1 Cycle removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .295.2 Layer assignment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .315.3 Vertex ordering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .325.4 Coordinate assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .345.5 Relations between subproblems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .366Conclusion396.1 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39References41A Additional benchmark data43List of Figures1Example of state machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .52The steps of the Sugiyama framework. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .73Before and after cycle removal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .84Before and after layer assignment.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .85Before and after vertex ordering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .96Before and after coordinate assignment. Original edge orientations are re-stored. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .107Output from the neato tool in Graphviz which uses the approach of Kamadaand Kawai.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .118An example of an orthogonal layout. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .129An instance of Eclipse running the plugin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1410A graph and its transitive reduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2211The two types of crossings.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2512Number of reversed edges for the Ericsson graph set. . . . . . . . . . . . . .3013Number of dummy vertices for the Ericsson graph set. . . . . . . . . . . . .3114Layer height (number of layers) for the Ericsson graph set. . . . . . . . . . .3215Number of crossings for the Ericsson graph set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3316Number of bends for the Ericsson graph set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3417Average angle of edges for the Ericsson graph set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3518Area of ﬁnal drawing for the Ericsson graph set.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3519Number of dummy vertices for the Ericsson graph set, in relation to cycleremoval algorithms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3620Number of crossings for the Ericsson graph set, in relation to cycle removalalgorithms.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3721Number of crossings for the Ericsson graph set, in relation to layer assign-ment algorithms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .37List of Tables1Shortened names of algorithms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .292Number of cycles for the ﬁles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .293Crossing number for the ﬁles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .33
4Normalised average of cycles removed for both graph sets. . . . . . . . . . .435Normalised average of layering measurements for both graph sets. . . . . . .436Normalised average of crossings for both graph sets.. . . . . . . . . . . . .437Normalised average of coordinate measurements for both graph sets. . . . .43List of Algorithms4.1.1 A simple heuristic by Berger and Shor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .174.1.2 An enhanced greedy heuristic by Eades et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .184.1.3 Cycle removal using depth-ﬁrst search. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .194.2.1 Longest path algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .204.2.2 Coﬀman-Graham layering algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .214.3.1 Main ordering function from Gansner et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .234.3.2 Median from Gansner et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .244.3.3 Transpose from Gansner et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .244.4.1 Priority method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
This page intentionally left blank.
1INTRODUCTION1Introduction1.1BackgroundEPG (Evolved Packet Gateway) is a network node developed by Ericsson that connects amobile network to the Internet. A lot of functionality exists in this node, such as variousforms of charging, packet inspection, communication with diﬀerent external servers, andso on. So the EPG software application contains a lot of sometimes complex logic thatdeals with these things. Also high performance is important, so the code is written in Cand C++.One way of reducing the complexity of the logic is to use state machines to model it. Astate machine is a well deﬁned model that consists of a number of logical states and thepossible transitions between these states. A variant of this is used in many places in theEPG application. A state machine framework written in C is used to deﬁne the statesand transitions of the state machine in the code. While powerful, it is quite diﬃcult touse since the states and transitions are deﬁned by manually creating C arrays containingfunction pointers and index values. This makes it hard to see how the states and transitionsactually interact.To solve this problem Ericsson wants a tool that can read these state machines and visualisethem as state diagrams.The tool should be in the form of a plugin for the EclipseIDE (integrated development environment) used at Ericsson. Since the code is updatedfrequently the diagrams need to be generated automatically and quickly. For the toolto satisfy these criteria while maintaining a good drawing quality it needs a good graphlayout algorithm.The ﬁeld of graph layout algorithms is vast and involves a wide array of diﬀerent solutionsand approaches to the graph drawing problem. There is no ﬁnal solution that ﬁts alltypes of graphs; graphs like state diagrams, however, have certain properties, primarilydirectionality, for which the Sugiyama framework [1], or layered graph drawing, is mostsuitable [2].1.2PurposeEricsson needs a way of visualising their state machines in an easy way to facilitate devel-opment. Therefore we aim to develop a plugin application for the Eclipse IDE that canparse Ericsson’s state machine framework and draw the corresponding state diagram.An integral part of drawing the graph is to have a good layout algorithm. To ﬁnd this, weintend to explore the Sugiyama framework [1] for drawing graphs, such as state diagrams.We will evaluate diﬀerent approaches to implementing this framework with Ericsson’s statemachines using a set of criteria commonly used in the area of graph layouts.The Sugiyama framework divides the graph layout problem into several smaller problems.Most research already done on the subject tends to review and compare algorithms onlywithin these smaller subproblems and not compare the whole combination. We aim to doboth in our study. We also aim to investigate further within the framework how exactsolutions compare to the diﬀerent heuristics that can be used.1
1.3Limitations1INTRODUCTION1.3LimitationsOur work, though applicable to graphs in general, mainly focuses on graphs deﬁned byEricsson’s state machines or those similar to them, whether in size or structure.Wehope that this will help limit the scope of the thesis and allow us to draw more speciﬁcconclusions.Our implementations of the various algorithms will not necessarily be optimised in termsof eﬃcient data structures. The focus is on replicating the behaviour of the the algorithmsand to discuss their theoretical properties, not to ensure the fastest possible running time.This limitation is due to time as well as the chosen platform (the Java programminglanguage) being relatively high-level.1.4MethodAt ﬁrst a preliminary study of graph drawing was conducted which led to the chosen focuson the Sugiyama framework for hierarchical graphs. The reason for this focus was that theSugiyama framework seemed to be the most popular method for drawing directed graphs.The main work consisted of two parts: development of the plugin for Ericsson and ﬁndinga good layout algorithm, which in turn consisted of a literature study, implementation andtesting. These were done concurrently throughout the project.We have implemented a visualisation tool as a plugin for Eclipse, using Eclipse itself andthe Java programming language. In the beginning a ﬁrst prototype of the plugin wasdeveloped with basic functionality such as the ability to parse Ericsson’s state machinesand render graphs of them using an existing graph layout program to provide layout data,such as vertex coordinates, for the drawing. The plugin was then released as a beta-versionto some chosen developers at Ericsson for testing who provided feedback which guided thecontinuing development.We also conducted a literature study of the ﬁeld of graph drawing, with a focus on theSugiyama framework.This led to discovering diﬀerent approaches to solving the var-ious sub-problems deﬁned in the framework.Some of the most common and eﬀectiveapproaches were chosen for implementation and testing.Implementation of diﬀerent graph layout algorithms was done within the plugin since itprovided a suitable test environment, having the basic functionality of rendering the graphalready in place.In order to evaluate the chosen algorithms a test set consisting of the Ericsson graphs, aswell as others, was assembled and several performance measures were chosen. Compar-ison between algorithms also centered around their theoretical properties, such as timecomplexity.The following tools and pieces of software were used in the project:• Graphviz - A collection of graph drawing tools, of which dot is one. Maintained byAT&T.http://www.graphviz.org/• GLPK (GNU Linear Programming Kit) - A free software LP solver.2
1.5Outline1INTRODUCTIONhttp://www.gnu.org/software/glpk/• GLPK for Java - A Java binding for GLPK.http://glpk-java.sourceforge.net/• Eclipse - An IDE (Integrated Development Environment).Used for Java andC/C++ amongst others. Also contains Eclipse CDT (C/C++ Development Tools)which can be used for parsing C/C++.http://eclipse.org/1.5OutlineIn this report we will start by going through some of the theory necessary to understandthe thesis. This theory includes a deﬁnition of Ericsson’s state machine framework, a quickoverview of the graph layout ﬁeld with the Sugiyama framework in focus, and ﬁnally ashort introduction to linear programming. After that we will cover the implementationstage which is presented in two chapters about the developed plugin and the implementedlayout algorithms. Finally we will walk you through and discuss the benchmark resultsand draw up a conclusion.3
2THEORY2Theory2.1The state machine frameworkFormally, a state machine as deﬁned by the framework used at Ericsson is an 8-tupleM = (S, ΣR, Fs, ΣE, Ft, T, G, H) where• S a ﬁnite set of states.• ΣR a ﬁnite set of raw events - these are the external input that the machine receives.• Fs a ﬁnite set of state functions - for each current state and raw event, at most oneof these is run.• ΣE a ﬁnite set of events - these are generated by the state functions and can beconsidered “internal” input.• Ft a ﬁnite set of transition function - these are run during a speciﬁc transitionbetween two states. These may also generate an event, which can then lead to animmediate transition when reaching the next state.• T : S × ΣR →Fs mapping a current state and a raw event to a state function name.• G : S × ΣE →S mapping a current state and an event to the next state.• H : S × S →Ft a partial function mapping an existing transition to a transitionfunction name.T and G may be thought of as partial functions, since many of the combinations areconsidered invalid in some way. H is necessarily partial since there is no requirement thatG deﬁnes a transition between each (ordered) pair of states.One may note that the above does not properly describe a traditional state machine, sincethere does not exist a direct connection between on the one hand input (raw events) andcurrent state and on the other hand transitions and output. The actual ﬂow is hiddenin the functionality of the state functions, which may or may not, possibly depending onexternal factors, generate an event leading to a transition.In the code, S, ΣR and ΣE are represented by enum declarations, Fs and Ft are simplearrays with pointers to C functions and T, G and H are matrices (in the form of arrays)containing an index into Fs, S or Ft respectively. Invalid combinations (which should notbe shown in the state diagram) are marked by a special value.During our work at Ericsson, the representation described above was replaced in some codeby a simpler one where the information was stored in a few lists of tuples, with invalidcombinations simply omitted. The logical components are still the same as described.Our visual representation is a, slightly modiﬁed, state diagram. States are vertices, whoselabels contain the name of the state and one row for each (valid) raw event name/statefunction name pair. Transitions are edges with labels containing one or more names ofevents that cause it and one transition function name. See ﬁgure 1 for a simple example.A possible execution for the state machine represented by ﬁgure 1 is the following:• The machine starts in state A and receives raw event 1.4
2.2Graph deﬁnitions2THEORYState ARaw event 1 -> State Function 1Raw event 2 -> State Function 2State BRaw event 1 -> State Function 3Raw event 2 -> State Function 4        Event 1Transition function 1        Event 2Transition function 2Figure 1: Example of state machine• This causes state function 1 to run. Here it is, as previously mentioned, not clearfrom the diagram what might happen. Let’s assume that the state function generatesevent 1.• This leads to a transition to state B as well as the running of transition function 1.• Assume that raw event 1 is received again. Let’s say that this does not lead to anytransition, since no event is generated by state function 3.• Raw event 2 is received.• State function 4 is run, which generates event 2.• The machine transitions to state A and transition function 2 is run.There are nine state machines in use at Ericsson which we aim to visualise. They are notvery large; they are on the order of 10-20 states and 20-50 transitions.2.2Graph deﬁnitionsA graph G = (V, E) is a pair of a set of vertices and a set of edges. An edge e = (v, w) ∈Eis an ordered pair of vertices from the set V .In our terminology, the word graph issynonymous with directed graph, or digraph. Usually there is a distinction made betweenthese and undirected graphs where the edge pairs are not ordered. State diagrams aregraphs according to this deﬁnition.Additionally, we mention acyclic graphs. These are graphs that contain no cycles, i.e.there is no directed path ((v1, v2), (v2, v3). . . (vn, v1)) (sequence of edges in E) startingfrom a vertex v1 and returning to itself. Directed acyclic graphs are often called simplyDAGs.When describing algorithms for graphs one often works with a vertex, v, and its connectededges E(v) and neighbouring vertices V (v). Since we are working with directed graphshowever we often separate these two sets into incoming and outgoing. For these we usethe notation E+(v) for edges with v as destination and V +(v) for the vertices which arethe sources of those edges. Respectively for outgoing we use E−(v) and V −(v).2.3Criteria for good graph layoutsMeasuring the quality of graph layouts is a complex and most subjective ﬁeld. There isno known optimal measure for deciding how good or bad a graph layout is, but there aresome criteria that are commonly used in graph research. A few of these are as follows: [2,3]5
2.4The Sugiyama framework2THEORYEdge crossings A drawing with few edge crossings is easier to read and follow than onewith many.Bounding box of graph A drawing should be as small as possible while maintainingreadability.Symmetry A drawing should ideally show the underlying symmetry of the graph. How-ever, there are no easily deduced automatic measures for symmetry.Simple edges Angles of edge bends should be minimised to improve readability. Anglesof more than 90 degrees should be avoided.Length of edges The length of edges should be minimised. A drawing with a lot of longedges can be hard to follow.Graph ﬂow The ﬂow of the graph should be preserved meaning edges should point in auniform direction.We should note that many of these criteria can conﬂict with each other - to ﬁnd theminimum number of edge crossings, for example, you may have to increase the size ofyour layout by an unreasonable amount.There may also be additional or alternativeimportant criteria; for example, recent studies have shown that maximising the angles ofthe remaining edge crossings after crossing minimisation improves readability [4].2.4The Sugiyama frameworkThe Sugiyama method, introduced by Sugiyama et al. in 1981 [1], is one of the mostpopular graph drawing schemes. Terms like “layered graph layout” are often used syn-onymously with “Sugiyama method” or “Sugiyama framework”. A layered layout placesthe vertices in layers where edges only go between diﬀerent layers.The idea of the framework is to divide the task of drawing a graph into several subproblems,most of which closely resemble other well known problems within computer science. Thatway one can use algorithms for the similar problems to solve the Sugiyama subproblemsand thereby simplify the graph layout process.The diﬀerent steps of the method areillustrated in ﬁgure 2. They are the following:(a-b) Cycle removal First the possibly cyclic graph must be made acyclic by removingcycles, done by reversing some edges.(b-c) Layer assignment Second, the vertices are assigned to layers and dummy verticesand dummy edges are introduced for every edge that spans over more than two layersso as to create a proper layering [2], i.e. one where every edge has its endpoints inadjacent layers.(c-d) Vertex ordering Third, the vertices are ordered within their layers to minimiseedge crossings.(d-e) Coordinate assignment Fourth and last, the vertices are assigned coordinates tocreate a balanced graph.All these four steps will be described further in this chapter.This division of the problem makes it possible to use diﬀerent approaches to the diﬀerentsubproblems and thus achieve diﬀerent results. However, solving each subproblem to (some6
2.4The Sugiyama framework2THEORYABCDEFGH(a)ABCDEFGH(b)ABCDEFGH(c)ABCDEFGH(d)ABCDEFGH(e)Figure 2: The steps of the Sugiyama framework.measure of) optimality does not necessarily mean that the main problem (that of graphlayout) is also solved optimally. This is especially so since each subproblem objective mayclash and interfere with the others.The framework has proven to be very popular and many implementations exist, includingdot [3], Microsoft Automatic Graph Layout [5] and Tulip [6].There exist also several variations and additions to this framework. The coordinate as-signment step, though now considered standard, was handled as a post-processing part inthe ordering step in Sugiyama et al.’s original paper [1]. Often there is also a ﬁfth step [3];that of converting edges into splines, a spline being a smooth polynomial interpolation of alist of points (an edge) making the drawing more aesthetically pleasing. A slight variationnecessary in order to handle edge labels is to create dummy vertices for each label next toits edge. The framework can also be used to create radial drawings where each new layeris placed in a surrounding circle instead of a row below [7]. These are but a few examplesand many more exist [2].2.4.1Cycle removalObjective: Make the graph acyclic by reversing as few edges as possible.Subsequent steps in the Sugiyama method require that the graph is acyclic. To achievethis, edges are reversed temporarily during the layout process and, of course, restoredat the end. Here it is desirable to keep the number of reversed edges small so that thehierarchical nature of the graph is expressed as clearly as possible in the ﬁnal drawing.The maximum acyclic subgraph problem is formulated thus: given a digraph G = (V, E)7
2.4The Sugiyama framework2THEORYABCDEFGH(a)ABCDEFGH(b)Figure 3: Before and after cycle removal.ﬁnd a set Ea ⊂E of maximum size such that the graph (V, Ea) contains no cycles. Thisis often known alternatively as the minimum feedback arc set (FAS) problem, formulatedthus: For a graph G = (V, E) ﬁnd a minimum set Ef ⊂E such that the graph (V, E \ Ef)contains no cycles. This was one of Karp’s original NP-hard problems [8].A recent result has shown the feedback arc set problem to be ﬁxed-parameter tractablein the number of cycles [9]. What this means is that there exists an algorithm for whichthe running time is bounded by f(k)|x|, where f is some computable function (typically asingle exponential), |x| the size of the input and k the parameter (in this case, the numberof cycles in the graph). Intuitively, one can say that the exponentiality is “contained” inthe parameter instead of applying to the whole input.The aforementioned intractability of the problem is not a big obstacle in this contextsince an optimal solution does not necessarily translate into a noticeably better drawing.Therefore polynomial-time heuristics are commonly used. Many such heuristics exist forthis problem with diﬀerent approximation bounds for the size of the set and some of thesewill be explored in the following chapters.2.4.2Layer assignmentObjective: Assign each vertex a layer so that each edge stretches between two dif-ferent layers.ABCDEFGH(a)ABCDEFGHL1L2L3L4L5(b)Figure 4: Before and after layer assignment.A layering of a graph G = (V, E) is a partitioning L = {L1, L2, . . . , Lh} of V such that8
2.4The Sugiyama framework2THEORYfor each edge (v, w), with v ∈Li and w ∈Lj, j > i. That is, what we wish to do is assignexactly one layer to each vertex such that there are no edges between vertices in the samelayer. Additionally, we want our layering to be proper, i.e. one where every edge has itsendpoints in adjacent layers - for this we must introduce dummy vertices and edges.Dummy vertices and edges are introduced for those edges that span over multiple layersso as to make the layering proper. This is a necessary assumption in subsequent steps.These dummy vertices are merged together again in the coordinate assignment stage.It is desirable to keep the number of dummy vertices created small. This is because therunning times of subsequent steps in the Sugiyama framework often depend on the totalnumber of vertices (including dummies). Also, a small number of dummy vertices meansthat the edges are short and should thus be easier to follow. This is therefore a usefulcriteria in judging the performance of a speciﬁc layer assignment algorithm.The problem of layer assignment when trying to minimise the height is very similar to theNP-hard job shop scheduling problem with job dependencies. That is where you are givenn jobs that may be dependent on other jobs, and m machines on which to divide these jobsin order to minimise the makespan. This makes it possible to use scheduling algorithmsalso for the layer assignment problem with a maximum width of vertices corresponding tothe m machines.The layer assignment problem can be solved by using heuristics to try to minimise diﬀerentproperties of the ﬁnal graph such as height, width and edge-length among others.2.4.3Vertex orderingObjective: Order the vertices in every layer so as to minimise the number of edgecrossings between all layers.ABCDEFGH(a)ABCDEFGH(b)Figure 5: Before and after vertex ordering.The main criteria for vertex ordering is the number of crossings as mentioned in section 2.3.Minimising crossings in the graph can improve its readability since each crossing cluttersthe graph and increases the risk of misinterpretation. In particular, crossing edges thatare close to parallel are very hard to follow.Ideally, we want to have no crossings; however, not all graphs are planar, i.e. there doesnot always exist a drawing of a graph without crossings. The equation in 1, given by9
2.4The Sugiyama framework2THEORYPach and T´oth [10], shows a relationship between the size of a graph and its minimumnumber of crossings. Additionally, the layering constraint provided by the previous stepin the Sugiyama framework may not admit a drawing with as few crossings as is otherwisepossible for the graph. Despite this, we try to draw with as few crossings as possible.crossings(G) ≥e364n2 , if e > 4n(1)Vertex ordering, or crossing minimisation, is often referred to as multi-layer crossing min-imisation (MLCM). Regrettably, the MLCM problem is NP-hard even in the simple caseof only two layers (TLCM) [11] and when one layer is ﬁxed (OLCM) [12]. Therefore,heuristics are often used.Most heuristics treat the problem as several one-sided layer minimisation (OLCM) sub-problems by considering each pair of adjacent layers on its own and sweeping throughthe layers from top to bottom. An exact solution on the other hand considers the wholeproblem as MLCM.2.4.4Coordinate assignmentObjective: Assign vertices x- and y-coordinates so as to straighten edges and min-imise graph size.ABCDEFGH(a)ABCDEFGH(b)Figure 6: Before and after coordinate assignment. Original edge orientations are restored.This is the ﬁnal step where the actual positions for the vertices are computed. Assigningy-coordinates for each vertex is trivial since it is simply based on which layer the vertex isin. Assigning x-coordinates however is more complicated since one wants to both minimisethe size of the graph and the number of zig-zagging edges through the layers, by ensuringthat long edges are as straight as possible. This is done while also maintaining the orderingof the vertices so as to keep the crossings minimised from the previous step. The solutionalso takes into account a minimum separation width between vertices and edges. The laststeps in this subproblem consist of merging together connected dummy vertices into theircorresponding long edge while saving the computed coordinates as points in the edge aswell as restoring the orientation of edges that were reversed during cycle removal.10
2.5Alternative solutions2THEORYThe heuristic solutions for coordinate assignment are often similar to those of the vertexordering problem since both problems can be approximately solved by considering theproblem layer by layer. Solutions for this problem often focus on criteria such as the totalsize of the drawing and the complexity of its edges, represented by the number of bendsand their angles.2.5Alternative solutionsThere exist several other approaches to the problem of graph drawing. These are men-tioned here in order to give an overview of the area and a background to the chosen focusof this thesis on the Sugiyama framework.2.5.1Force-directed algorithmsFigure 7: Output from the neato tool in Graphviz which uses the approach of Kamada andKawai [13].One of the more popular [2] kinds of layout algorithms is those based on a mechanicalsystem of forces.The main principle behind these algorithms is the use of attractiveand repellent forces between vertices, with the vertices being iteratively moved until thesystem reaches or is close to an equilibrium. Usually vertices are replaced with electrons,making them repel other vertices, and edges with springs, making them attract connectedvertices. Now we can use the physical laws of electromagnetism and springs (Hooke’s law)to calculate the forces directed at each vertex. If we iteratively calculate these forces andmove the vertices respectively then we will eventually be close to an equilibrium, meaningthat the vertices have now been placed in such a way that the attractive and repellentforces cancel each other out.The diﬀerent algorithms within this area of force-based algorithms primarily diﬀer in theway this system is calculated. Three of these algorithms are those of Eades, Kamada-Kawai and Fruchterman-Reingold which we will describe further.Eades was the ﬁrst to present an algorithm with this force-based approach, often calledthe spring embedder model [14].Eades uses springs for both attractive and repellentforces. The springs between connected vertices are of unit length while springs betweenunconnected vertices are of inﬁnite length. To calculate attractive and repulsive forces heuses his own formula instead of Hooke’s law.11
2.5Alternative solutions2THEORYThe key points with the algorithm of Kamada & Kawai [13] is that it uses an entirelyspring-based system and that it only moves one vertex at a time. In this system there is aspring between every vertex even if they are not connected with the length of the springbeing based on the shortest path (graph theoretical distance) between the two vertices.The basic steps of the algorithm are as follows:1. Pick the vertex with the highest energy.2. Use Newton-Raphson’s method [15] to ﬁnd its position closest to equilibrium.3. RepeatFruchterman & Reingold [16] use a model where vertices are electrons, exerting re-pellent forces against each other, and edges are springs as in the examples previouslymentioned. The key diﬀerence of this algorithm is that:1. Displacement is calculated for all vertices every iteration as in Eades.2. A temperature that cools for every iteration is used to slow down the process towardsthe ﬁnal iterations.Force-directed approaches are especially useful when visualising large amounts of data,such as social networks. Other advantages include a relatively simple implementation andfast running time. They excel at showing graph symmetry, which is a very importantcriteria and hard to achieve otherwise. A disadvantage is that the layout produced canbe far from optimal depending on the initial layout, which is often randomly generated.The methods do not consider the directionality of the edges so hierarchical properties ofthe graph are not clearly expressed.2.5.2Orthogonal layoutaedghfcijbFigure 8: An example of an orthogonal layout.Vertices are arranged in a regular pattern, where each edge consists of alternating hori-zontal and vertical segments. Dummy vertices are inserted at crossing points in order tomake the graph planar. In representations where a vertex is a point, the maximum degreeof a graph that can be drawn is four; this can be solved if rectangular areas are allowed.This type of layout, also called Manhattan layout, originated in Very Large Scale Interac-tion (VLSI) contexts in the 1970s [2]. In this application, the vertices are ﬁxed and it isthe edges (or wires) that need to be placed while minimising their length.12
2.6Linear Programming2THEORY2.6Linear ProgrammingA linear program (LP) is a mathematical formulation of an optimisation problem. Theycan always be expressed on the following canonical form [17]:maximise cT xsubject to Ax ≤band x ≥0(2)where the ﬁrst line is the objective function, consisting of a vector c of coeﬃcients and avector x of variables, the second line contains a matrix A and a vector b who together deﬁnethe linear constraints and the third line which constrains the variables to be non-negative.For minimisation problems, values can easily be adjusted to ﬁt into the deﬁnition.Fast algorithms (in both the theoretical and practical sense) exist for solving this kind ofproblem, when the variables are allowed to take real values. When an integer constraintis added the problem becomes computationally hard, however, and no general polynomialalgorithm exists. Problems with this constraint are called Integer Linear Programs (ILP).13
3STATE MACHINE VISUALISATION PLUGIN3State Machine Visualisation pluginFigure 9: An instance of Eclipse running the plugin.Previously, Ericsson had used a script written in C that parsed through some of the statemachines and output DOT language (a description language for graphs) ﬁles that one thenmanually invoked dot (the layout tool which uses the Sugiyama framework) on in orderto get state diagram images. This limited the ease of interaction with the developmentenvironment (Eclipse) and allowed none of the functionality possible when integrating thestate diagram into an application.The diagram produced by this script was used as a stylistic starting point for our program.The same format for e.g. displaying labels remained in our implementation, as seen in ﬁgure9 and described in section 2.1.Some of the notable features of the plugin include:• Rendering of diagram from state machine deﬁned in code.• Clickable functions in the diagram redirect to deﬁnition in code• Search function for text in graph labels, like events and functions.• Colouring the diagram and exporting to image (for documentation purposes).Some of these are elaborated further below. Together they make the plugin more dynamicand helpful than the old static script.3.1ParsingSome parsing of C ﬁles is done by the plugin to retrieve the diﬀerent constructs of thestate machine (detailed in section 2.1). The built-in Eclipse CDT (C/C++ DevelopmentTools) parser (which ordinarily points out syntax errors etc. to a developer) is here usedto provide an abstract syntax tree of the ﬁle which is traversed using a visitor pattern.14
3.2User interface3STATE MACHINE VISUALISATION PLUGINThe actual code at Ericsson that uses the state machine framework consists of relativelyfew ﬁles which are old and unlikely to change in any major way within the nearest future.This made feasible, in the short term, the approach of hard-coding several elements ofthe parser. The aim, however, was to construct a parser that, as far as possible, made noassumptions about the code other than that it adhered to the actual framework. A fewconcessions were made in this regard where necessary, such as assuming a speciﬁc nameof a construct or that values were given in a speciﬁc way.One challenge encountered in the parsing of the C source was the extraordinary amountof time it sometimes took to build the abstract syntax tree when deployed in Ericsson’sLinux environment. This problem arose from two factors: that the size of the tree wasbloated by extra (for our purposes) unnecessary included header ﬁles and that Ericssonuses a network ﬁle system which tended to be slow. This was not a problem in our localWindows development environment where the header ﬁles did not exist.Since some parts of the state machine are usually located in the header ﬁle, it was initiallyconsidered a positive thing that all header ﬁles were automatically included and onlyone syntax tree produced. However, with the parsing taking upwards of one minute, theusability of the plugin would have been impaired. This was solved when we discoveredthe option of telling CDT’s parser to skip including any headers - this then required theconstruction of a second syntax tree for the necessary header ﬁle and two subsequenttraversals for the parser.Another feature also uses built-in CDT functionality. Clicking on a name of a state ortransition function in the state diagram opens its deﬁnition in code. This works regard-less of whether the function deﬁnition is contained in the same ﬁle as the state machinedeﬁnition. This is achieved using CDT’s source ﬁle indexer.The plugin can also parse ﬁles written in GraphML1, a ﬁle format for graphs. The formatis here used as an easy way to store input to the benchmarking procedure. It is based onXML, which made the parsing implementation easier by enabling the use of existing XMLlibraries.3.2User interfaceFor drawing graphs in the plugin we use dot to generate layout data - that is, x andy positions and spline control points - and then use this to draw the graph using Javacomponents with the Draw2d framework2. Using Java components, as opposed to a staticimage, allowed more dynamic GUI functionality.The main reason for using dot instead of our implementations of the Sugiyama framework,which are described in the coming sections, is that in order to make our implementationslook good we would have to implement the additional step of smooth edge drawing usingsplines as well as clear edge labels using additional dummy vertices (see section 2.4). Theformer would have required a non-trivial amount of eﬀort while the latter could have beenattempted; none of them were a focus in this project, however, since they are not consideredtraditional parts of the Sugiyama framework. Also, dot already produces adequate layoutsincluding splines and edge labels while being easy to interface to. Another reason is that1GraphML homepage: http://graphml.graphdrawing.org/2Draw2d homepage: http://www.eclipse.org/gef/draw2d/15
3.3Benchmarking3STATE MACHINE VISUALISATION PLUGINthe implemented algorithms in dot turned out to perform well in our benchmarks as seenin section 5.The GUI supports selecting and highlighting vertices and edges which in turn triggers aninformation box that shows detailed information about the selected object. Also integratedis a search ﬁeld which searches through all vertices and edges and selects those that matchthe search. These features can be seen in our screenshot of the program (ﬁgure 9).3.3BenchmarkingTo ease the development of the layout implementations we constructed the plugin to beable to switch between normal mode (parsing Ericsson’s state machines and using dot forlayout) and “debug” mode (parsing either Ericsson’s state machines or other graphs fromGraphML, and using either dot or our layout implementations for layout). This way wecould easily use the plugin to test our layout implementations on all graphs.To produce the results as seen in section 5 we have written an automated benchmarkprogram that iterates over test data in a folder and tests it with every possible layoutcombination while saving the results to an SQLite3 database. From this database we canthen easily fetch the results we want.16
4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONS4Layout implementationsIn the previous section we talked about the implementation of the plugin. Here we willdescribe the algorithms we have implemented for our study, grouped by the steps fromthe Sugiyama framework. All time complexity analyses here assume eﬃcient data struc-tures. Our own implementations may or may not actually adhere to this principle - thislimitation is the reason that actual running time is not a main factor in our discussion ofan algorithm’s results.4.1Cycle removal4.1.1A simple heuristicThis simple algorithm ﬁrst described by Berger and Shor [18] works by reversing, for eachvertex, either the set of incoming (E+(v)) or outgoing edges (E−(v)) - whichever one issmaller. Edges and vertices that are visited are removed temporarily in the running ofthe algorithm but restored afterwards. The graph produced by this procedure is acyclic,proven by the following argument:Suppose the graph has a cycle (v1, v2, . . . vn). Then there is a vertex vi that was the ﬁrstto be processed by the algorithm. But then either edge (vi−1, vi) or (vi, vi+1 would havebeen reversed and there can be no cycle. We have a contradiction and can conclude thatthe graph must be acyclic.This algorithm guarantees that the set Er of edges to be reversed is no more than halfas large as the total number of edges E. The proof is by the following argument: allvertices are traversed and for each one, all its edges are either reversed and removed orjust removed. In each step, at most as many edges are reversed as those that aren’t.Time complexity is O(|V | + |E|). For each vertex, all its edges (except for those thathave already been removed when visiting their other respective endpoints) are countedand then removed.Algorithm 4.1.1 A simple heuristic by Berger and Shor [18].1: function remove cycles(G)2:Er ←∅3:for all v ∈G do4:if |E+(v)| ≥|E−(v)| then5:Er ←Er ∪E−(v)6:else7:Er ←Er ∪E+(v)8:end if9:delete E(v) from G;10:end for11: end function17
4.1Cycle removal4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONS4.1.2An enhanced greedy heuristicEades et al. [19] describe a new algorithm with an improved performance bound.Inthis solution, vertices are processed in a special order. It makes use of the observationthat edges incident to sources and sinks (vertices with no incoming and outgoing edges,respectively) cannot be part of a cycle.We can relate this algorithm (see pseudocode 4.1.2) with the previous one (algorithm4.1.1) by noting that they are essentially the same; only this one processes the vertices ina special order, starting with sinks (vertices with no outgoing edges) and progressing tosources (with no incoming edges). To ﬁnd this ordering while keeping the running timelinear in the size of the graph one is slightly more dependant on an eﬃcient implementation.Eades et al. advice using a bucket sort algorithm.Because of its similarity to the previous algorithm, the same correctness argument applieshere. For performance, however, it can be shown that the set of reversed edges is no biggerthan |E|2 −|V |6 . The full proof of this can be seen in the original paper [19].Algorithm 4.1.2 An enhanced greedy heuristic by Eades et al. [19]. Pseudocode basedon Bastert & Matuszewski [20].1: function remove cycles(G)2:Er ←∅3:while G not empty do4:while G contains a sink v do5:delete v and E−(v) from G6:end while7:delete from G all vertices v with |E(v)| = 08:while G contains a source v do9:delete v and E+(v) from G10:end while11:if G is not empty then12:let v be a vertex in G with maximum value |E+(v)| −|E−(v)|13:add E−(v) to Er and delete v and E(v) from G14:end if15:end while16: end function4.1.3Depth-ﬁrst searchThe dot tool in Graphviz uses a depth-ﬁrst search type algorithm (pseudocode shown in4.1.3). The output of the algorithm is the set Er of edges to be reversed.The algorithm works by using the on stack set to keep track of what vertices have alreadybeen encountered during the current iteration. When the same vertex is seen again, theedge to it is added to Er and removed (temporarily during the running of the algorithm)from the graph.The marked set contains all vertices that have been visited over thecomplete run. Time complexity is O(|V |+|E|), since all vertices and all edges are traversedin the worst case.The algorithm is reasonably fast but does not give any performance guarantees by itself.18
4.1Cycle removal4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONSAdding another step could solve this, however: after the running of the algorithm, reverseeither edges in Er or its complement, i.e. edges that are in E (the set of all edges in thegraph) but not in Er - whichever is smaller. This would ensure that no more than halfof the edges are reversed while still resulting in an acyclic graph. The implementation indot does not use this step however, and so neither do we. As we shall see in section 5 thisseems to not be an issue.Algorithm 4.1.3 Cycle removal using depth-ﬁrst search. Based on dot source code.1: function remove cycles(G)2:Er ←∅3:marked = ∅4:on stack = ∅5:for v ∈G do6:depth ﬁrst search(v)7:end for8: end function9: function depth first search(v)10:if v ∈marked then11:return12:end if13:marked = marked ∪{v}14:on stack = on stack ∪{v}15:for (v, w) ∈E+(v) do16:if w ∈on stack then17:Er = Er ∪{(v,w)}18:Remove (v,w) from G19:else20:if w /∈marked then21:depth ﬁrst search(w)22:end if23:end if24:end for25:on stack = on stack \ {v}26: end function4.1.4LP formulationThe problem of cycle removal can be formulated as an integer linear program in thefollowing way:minXi̸=jxijsubject to xi1i2 + xi2i3 + ... + xik−1ik ≥1if (i1, i2, ..., ik) is a cycle in V, k ≥20 ≤xij ≤1xij integer(3)This and many other formulations are described in [21]. We chose the one above mainly19
4.2Layer assignment4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONSfor its simplicity. There is one variable xij for each edge between vertices i and j, whichis set to one if that edge is reversed.The idea is simply to break all cycles by reversing one edge in each cycle. However, thisrequires that all cycles are known; this can be achieved by using Johnson’s algorithmfor ﬁnding cycles. For pseudo-code, we refer to Johnson’s paper [22]. There he showsthat, for a graph G = (V, E) with c cycles, his algorithm has a running time bounded byO((|V | + |E|)(c + 1)).4.2Layer assignment4.2.1Longest pathTrademark: Layers vertex to layer i where i is the length of the longest path froma sourceLongest path layering is a list scheduling algorithm which is frequently used in the Sugiyamaframework since it produces drawings with the smallest possible height [2] and is simpleto implement, for example as a variation of Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm with neg-ative weights or as described by Tamassia et al. [2], seen in algorithm 4.2.1. It can beimplemented with time complexity linear in the size of the graph.The main idea is that given an acyclic graph we place the vertices on the i:th layer wherei is the length of the longest path to the vertex from a source vertex. The algorithm in4.2.1 picks vertices whose incoming edges only come from past layers (Z) and assigns themto the current layer U. When there is no vertex left that ﬁts that condition the layer isincremented and it starts over again until all vertices have been assigned a layer.Algorithm 4.2.1 Longest path algorithm from Tamassia et al. [2].Require: A DAG G = (V, E)1: U ←∅2: Z ←∅3: currentLayer ←14: while U ̸= V do5:Select vertex v ∈V \U with V +(v) ⊆Z6:if v has been selected then7:Assign v to the layer with number currentLayer8:U ←U ∪{v}9:end if10:if no vertex has been selected then11:currentLayer ←currentLayer + 112:Z ←Z ∪U13:end if14: end while20
4.2Layer assignment4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONS4.2.2Coﬀman-GrahamTrademark: Layers with a given maximum width W, i.e. number of vertices perlayerThe Coﬀman-Graham algorithm [23], like the longest path method, is a list schedulingalgorithm that can also be used for layer assignment.It produces a layering with amaximum width of a given parameter W, which corresponds to the number of machinesm in the job shop scheduling deﬁnition mentioned earlier (section 2.4.2).As seen in algorithm 4.2.2, it ﬁrst numbers all vertices in order of their number of incomingedges. After that it loops until all vertices have been assigned and in every iteration it picksa vertex such that its outgoing edges only go to unassigned vertices and which maximisesthe numbering from the ﬁrst step. After a vertex has been picked we check if we shouldadd it to the current layer or a new layer by checking against the parameter W and alsomake sure that any edges aren’t connected with the current layer so as to avoid horizontaledges.Algorithm 4.2.2 Coﬀman-Graham layering algorithm [2].Require: A DAG G = (V, E) without transitive edges and an integer W > 01: for all v ∈V do2:λ(v) ←∞3: end for4: for i ←1 to |V | do5:Choose v ∈V with λ(v) = ∞such that |V −(v)| is minimised6:λ(v) ←i7: end for8: k ←1, L1 ←∅, U ←∅9: while U ̸= V do10:Choose v ∈V \U such that V +(v) ⊆U and λ(v) is maximised11:if |Lk| ≤W and V +( v) ⊆L1 ∪L2 ∪· · · ∪Lk−1 then12:Lk ←Lk ∪{v}13:else14:k ←k + 1; Lk ←{v}15:end if16:U ←U ∪{v}17: end whileIn order for this to work properly a preprocessing step is required to transform the graphinto its transitive reduction. What this means is that all edges (u, w) for which the edges(u, v) and (v, w) exist (with v distinct from u and w) are removed. For an example of atransitive reduction, see ﬁgure 10.The worst-case time complexity of the algorithm itself is O(|V |2) [23]. However, whencomputing of the transitive reduction is accounted for we get a complexity of O(|V |3) [24].For W = 2, the algorithm produces the optimal layering [23], i.e. the one with the fewestpossible layers. Because of this we chose to use W = 2 when running our benchmarks.Additionally, in order to be better able to compare it with other algorithms in our bench-marks we decided to include a run using a value of W =p|V |. The motivation for this21
4.3Vertex ordering4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONSABCD(a)ABCD(b)Figure 10: A graph and its transitive reduction.is that it should also be able to produce layerings where the width is not dependent on aﬁxed constant but on the size of the graph itself.4.2.3LP formulationTrademark: Minimise the total edge length.The problem can be formulated as the following integer linear program [3,25] when tryingto minimise the lengths of edges in the graph, where the length of an edge is the numberof layers it stretches over:minX(v,w)∈Eω(v, w)(λ(w) −λ(v))subject to λ(w) −λ(v) ≥δ(v, w), ∀(v, w) ∈E(4)Where λ(v) is the layer vertex v is assigned to and ω(v, w) and δ(v, w) deﬁne a weight forand a minimum length of edge (v, w) respectively (these functions usually have the value1).An interesting note: the constraint matrix for this linear program is totally unimodular[17], which means that there always exists an integer solution if any solution exists atall. Because of this there is no need for this to be formulated as an ILP problem and theproblem can be eﬃciently solved with the simplex method, commonly used for solvingordinary LP instances.4.3Vertex ordering4.3.1Barycenter and MedianTrademark: Layer-by-layer: Place vertex at barycenter (average) or median of con-nected vertices in last layerThe vertex ordering problem is usually solved by using the barycenter or the medianfunction [3, 12]. Both these solutions sweep through the graph layer by layer such thatthe previous layer is already ordered and ﬁnished when the current layer’s ordering iscalculated. In these sweeps they calculate a value based on the edges between the previouslayer and the current vertex which decides where in the layer the current vertex is to22
4.3Vertex ordering4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONSbe positioned. The barycenter function uses the average of the vertex positions of theconnected vertices on the previous layer to position the current vertex while the medianfunction uses the median of the same positions to do the positioning. As an example, avertex with connected vertices in the previous layer at {1,2,5} gets a position of 4 withbarycenter (average) and 2 with median. The sweeps are done three times, ﬁrst top tobottom, then bottom to top and last top to bottom again. This is done to make sure thatall vertices are considered in the ordering.In the case that there exists an ordering within two layers that gives zero crossings boththe median and barycenter will ﬁnd it [12]. However, this guarantee is only valid whenconsidering two layers (TLCM). Because the algorithms are sweeping through the graphlayer-by-layer there is no guarantee that such an ordering is possible.Gansner et al. [3] use the median function with mainly one improvement: they add anadditional heuristic to reduce obvious crossings after the median function has orderedthe layers. The heuristic iterates over adjacent vertex pairs in the same layer and swapstheir positions if this improves (decreases) the number of crossings. By adding this simpleheuristic, called transpose, the number of crossings can decrease even further. Also, theyrun the entire algorithms multiple times based on the previous result and then picks thebest solution (one with least crossings). The following pseudocode in algorithms 4.3.1,4.3.2 and 4.3.3 describe the median ordering used by Gansner et al. [3].In our implementations and benchmarks we have four diﬀerent but very similar algorithms:Median with transpose is the algorithm described in pseudocode (4.3.1), that is, ituses the median and the transpose functions.Barycenter with transpose uses the barycenter (average) instead of the median, anduses transpose.Median uses the median but not the transpose function.Barycenter uses the barycenter (average) but not the transpose function.Algorithm 4.3.1 Main ordering function from Gansner et al. [3].1: function ordering2:order = init order();3:best = order;4:for i = 0 →Max iterations do5:wmedian(order,i);6:transpose(order);7:if crossing(order) > crossing(best) then8:best = order;9:end if10:end for11:return best;12: end function23
4.3Vertex ordering4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONSAlgorithm 4.3.2 Median from Gansner et al. [3]. Barycenter works similarly but usesthe average instead of the median.1: function wmedian(order,iter)2:if iter % 2 == 0 then3:for r = 1 →Max layer do4:for v ∈order[r] do5:median[v] = median value of vertices in rank r-1 connected to v6:end for7:sort(order[r],median);8:end for9:else10:...11:end if12: end functionAlgorithm 4.3.3 Transpose from Gansner et al. [3]. Loops through all neighbouringvertices and tests if transposing them decreases the number of crossings.1: function transpose(layer)2:improved = True;3:while improved do4:improved = False;5:for r=0 →Max layer do6:for r = 0 →|layer[r]|-2 do7:v = layer[r][i];8:w = layer[r][i+1];9:if crossing(v,w) > crossing(w,v) then10:improved = True;11:exchange(v,w);12:end if13:end for14:end for15:end while16: end function24
4.3Vertex ordering4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONS4.3.2LP formulationTrademark: Minimise the number of crossings using pair-wise comparisons.When formulating the problem we need a way to model the ordering of the vertices withinlayers. To do this we use the notation xij which tells us which order i and j is in: xij is 1if vertex i lies before j and 0 otherwise.The following equation (5) is a simpliﬁcation which we have derived from J¨unger et al. [26].minX(i,j),(k,l)∈Ecijklsubject to xik + xlj −cijkl ≤1, (i, j), (k, l) ∈Exki + xjl −cijkl ≤1, (i, j), (k, l) ∈E0 ≤xij + xjk −xik ≤1, 0 ≤i < j < k < n1 ≤xab + xba ≤1cijkl, xij integer(5)As seen in equation 5 we want to minimise crossings between edges (i, j) and (k, l)(ﬁrstrow), and by comparing all edge pairs coming from the same layer we can easily come upwith the two possible crossing scenarios as seen in ﬁgure 11. These two types of crossingsare modelled by the constraints in rows two and three respectively. We also need a globalrule, that of transitivity seen in the fourth row, to hold the smaller subproblems together.The ﬁfth row is necessary to keep xab and xba as inverses of each other.klji(a)kijl(b)Figure 11: The two types of crossings.Unfortunately, this formulation showed to be very slow to compute when the number ofvertices and edges grew. For some combinations on the bigger graphs in our benchmark itcould take up to three days to complete, making us have to skip it in our data section fora few of our test graphs. This could be because the formulation is not properly optimisedfor an LP solver. However, that kind of optimisation was outside of the scope of this thesisand was therefore not investigated further here.25
4.4Coordinate assignment4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONS4.4Coordinate assignment4.4.1Priority methodTrademark: Layer-by-layer: In a prioritised order, place each vertex at the barycen-ter of its neighbours.The priority method [27] is very similar to the barycenter ordering solution since it, foreach vertex v, tries to place v based on its neighbours’ average positions. The diﬀerencebetween them is that the priority method assigns every vertex a priority based on twocriteria:Total degree of edges connected to the previous layer. A high degree means the vertexis highly connected and should be prioritised over less connected vertices.Dummy vertex means that the vertex is a part of an edge. By giving dummy verticesthe highest priority we are also prioritising straightening edges.A vertex with high priority can override and move lower priority vertices as needed, makingsure that those highly connected vertices or long edges get placed where they should. Thereasoning behind this is that it “costs” more to move a highly connected vertex to thewrong place than it does for a less connected one.Algorithm 4.4.1 Priority method.1: initialise vertex positions2: for each layer Li in: L1 →Ln, Ln−1 →L0 and L1 →Ln do3:calculate priority for all v ∈Li based on connections to the previous L4:for v ∈Li in order of highest priority do5:place v as close as possible to the barycenter of connected vertices in previousL while, if needed, moving only vertices of lower priority6:end for7: end for4.4.2LP formulationTrademark: Minimise the diﬀerence in x-position between connected vertices main-taining separation constraints.The LP formulation seen in equation 6 comes from Gansner et al. [3] and describes howto minimise the diﬀerence in x-position between all pairs of vertices that share an edgewhile favoring to straighten long edges.minX(v,w)∈EΩ(e)ω(e)|xw −xv|subject to xb −xa ≥ρ(a, b)ρ(a, b) = xsize(a) + xsize(b)2+ vertexsep(6)26
4.4Coordinate assignment4LAYOUT IMPLEMENTATIONSω(e) is the weight of the edge; in our case we don’t have any weights so it is always equalto 1. Ω(e) is more interesting, however; it is used to make the solution favor straighteninglong edges over shorter ones. It can take three diﬀerent values depending on the endpointsof e being dummy vertices.e can have both endpoints as dummy vertices, only oneendpoint as a dummy vertex or none of them. In order to favor straightening long edgeswe then get Ω(none) < Ω(one) < Ω(both). In accordance with Gansner et al. we useactual values 1, 4 and 8. xsize(v) is the width of the vertex v, often depending on the sizeof a text label associated with it. vertexsep is the minimum separation between verticesin the drawing.27
5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONS5Evaluation of implementationsThe following results come primarily from benchmarks of graphs that represent nine ofEricsson’s state machines, but we will also backup our claims with benchmarks of a largertest set of DAGs called the North DAGs1. Around 200 of these are used, chosen to becomparable in size to the Ericsson graphs, providing us with more statistical certaintyfor our claims. The criteria we will investigate are some of those mentioned earlier (seesection 2.3) plus some additional criteria applicable to the speciﬁc subproblems in orderto evaluate them against each other. After having evaluated the algorithms within theirsubproblems we will continue by looking at the relations between algorithms in diﬀerentsubproblems.In order to evaluate cycle removal algorithms against the larger data set of the NorthDAGs (directed acyclic graphs), we have actually modiﬁed them by randomly reversingedges to create cycles. Henceforth, whenever we mention the North DAGs we are referringto this modiﬁed set.The amount of results received from running these nine graphs and 200 of the NorthDAGs is quite massive. This arises from the large amount of combinations of the diﬀerentalgorithms described. We have a total of 4 ∗4 ∗5 ∗2 = 160 diﬀerent combinations totest for each graph; four algorithms for cycle removal, four for layer assignment (two runswith Coﬀman-Graham with diﬀerent W parameter), ﬁve for vertex ordering and two forcoordinate assignment. Because of this several limitations are necessary in order to beable to analyse this data.When it comes to the North DAGs we have to normalise results in order to comparebetween runs on the many diﬀerent graphs and to produce an average between them. Agraph with a lot of edges, for example, might have a lot of crossings where a graph with onlya few edges might not have as many. This particular case can be normalised by dividingthe number of crossings with the number of edges in the graph and thus make it possibleto compare an algorithm’s results on diﬀerent graphs with each other. However, thesenormalisations are not 100% correct since there might not be a linear relation between forexample crossings and the number of edges; it might only be correlated and this will limitthe accuracy of our results.The main diagrams we use for presenting our data are histograms where there is one setof stacks for each ﬁle and for each ﬁle there is one stack for the pure LP combination andthen one for each algorithm (see table 1) in the current subproblem. Also, each algorithmstack is divided into three parts: the lower part is the average of the lowest 10% in thedata, the middle part is the average of all the data and the upper part is the average of theupper 10%. The reasoning behind having a separate stack for the pure LP combination isto have somewhat of a baseline for comparison and, possibly, to see whether the diﬀerentsteps can interfere with each other to make a pure LP solution perform worse than oneincluding heuristics.We also refer to tables in the appendix which represent test data for both graph sets.These are the normalised values: for example, the average number of crossings achievedfor a graph by a speciﬁc algorithm, over all the combinations the algorithm appears in,is divided by the number of edges in the graph. The average of this value over all the1DownloadpageforNorthDAGs(directedacyclicgraphs)deﬁnedinGraphML:http://www.graphdrawing.org/data/28
5.1Cycle removal5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONSSubproblemFull nameAbbreviationAllPure LP combinationXCycle removalSimple heuristicSGreedy heuristicGDepth-ﬁrst searchDLinear programmingLPLayer assignmentLongest pathLCoﬀman-Graham W = 2C2Coﬀman-Graham W =p∥V ∥CSLinear programmingLPVertex orderingBarycenterBBarycenter with transposeBTMedianMMedian with transposeMTLinear programmingLPCoordinate assignmentPriority methodPLinear programmingLPTable 1: Shortened names of algorithms.graphs is then taken. To get a value centered around 1 we then also divide by the averageachieved over all algorithms.This makes it easier to see how the diﬀerent algorithmscompare against each other.However, by looking at the tables in the appendix we can see that there is no noticeablediﬀerence in performance of algorithms between Ericsson’s graphs and the North DAGs.For this reason we will focus our discussion on the Ericsson graphs.5.1Cycle removalAll cycle removal algorithms solve the problem correctly, i.e.they all produce acyclicgraphs. The measurement used here is how many edges the algorithm has reversed. Thereversed edges are the ones that point “against the ﬂow” in the ﬁnal drawing; this numberis therefore useful to minimise in order to properly show the hierarchical nature the graph.File|V ||E|CyclesSelf-edgesF171320F2727253F31033162F4142400F51538178F61729130F7224110F82253140F92258211Table 2: Number of cycles for the ﬁles.For reference, we give the number of cycles in each graph in table 2. These impose an29
5.1Cycle removal5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONSupper bound on the number of reversed edges in the optimal solution. This bound isweak since an edge may participate in many cycles. We also give the number of self-edges,i.e. cycles involving only one vertex. These are included in the number of cycles but arehandled separately by the implementation; they are trivial to ﬁnd and are not taken intoaccount by our layout algorithms, so they can safely be removed during the computation.Figure 12: Number of reversed edges for the Ericsson graph set.From ﬁgure 12, we can see one clear outlier in the simple heuristic. Notably, it reversesﬁve edges in a graph (F4) which our table (2) shows us is already acyclic and which theother algorithms manage to leave unmolested. From the deﬁnition we can expect this- the only kind of graph for which no edges would be removed is one with exactly twovertices and edges from one to the other. The only apparent strengths of this heuristicare its linear time complexity and its simplicity. This result suggests a possible additionof a procedure to check if the graph is already acyclic - this could be implemented linearlyand easily using a depth-ﬁrst search (basically similar to the depth-ﬁrst search algorithmused here with the exception of stopping execution as soon as a cycle is found).Another that does not perform as well is the depth-ﬁrst search algorithm. It is the worstof the lot when looking at graph F6. Overall, the diﬀerence is not that great, though. Theenhanced greedy heuristic, however, excels. It is close to matching the (optimal) value ofthe LP formulation. This, coupled with its good theoretical bounds on performance andrunning time, makes it our winner in this category when looking at the heuristics.We must also stress that the particular solution generated by a cycle removal algorithmcan greatly aﬀect the later stages in the layout process. Though two solutions may reversethe same number of cycles, thus performing equally well according to the measure usedhere, the particular edges that are reversed may diﬀer.How this, in turn, aﬀects thequality of the ﬁnal drawing is hard to predict, however.30
5.2Layer assignment5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONS5.2Layer assignmentWe measure the performance of layer assignment algorithms by the size of the layeringand the number of dummy vertices created. The more dummy vertices a graph has, thebigger and more complex the graph becomes for subsequent steps.Figure 13: Number of dummy vertices for the Ericsson graph set.We take a look at the dummy vertices in ﬁgure 5.2. Remember that the amount of theseis preferred small since less dummy vertices means shorter edges which results in a graphthat is easier to follow. Also, the total number of vertices (dummy and otherwise) impactsthe size of the input of subsequent steps in the framework and thus the running time. Wesee that in some cases the number is very large - graphs F7, F8 and F9 all reach over 200in some runs, to be compared with the number of actual vertices which is only 22. Thisis because the layering algorithms have placed some connected vertices at very diﬀerentlayers and thus created very long edges containing dummy vertices.We see that the LP solution performs best, which is expected since it is actually dummyvertices that it minimises (minimising edge length is the same as minimising dummyvertices). The longest path algorithm takes second place and this is also a bit expectedsince as we mentioned earlier it produces a layering with the minimum makespan, thelayer height, which in turn is related to the number of dummy vertices since a shortergraph equals shorter edges and thus fewer dummy vertices.We can clearly see also that Coﬀman-Graham’s algorithm with W = 2 performs horribly;this is to be expected with the restriction of two vertices per layer. As mentioned in section4.2.2, the layering thus produced is optimal for that case, but this is not of great practicalvalue since a maximum width of two is often too small even with our small graphs. Thevariant of the algorithm with W =p|V | overall performs better, though generally not asgood as the other algorithms. The algorithm’s strength, which lies in the ability to specifythe maximum width W, was not considered an important feature in our application andtherefore we consider it a loser according to our tests.31
5.3Vertex ordering5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONSNotably, on ﬁle F7 in the diagram, the pure LP combination (labeled X in the diagram)performs much worse than the best competing combination. The simple cycle removalalgorithm here allowed for a much better value for this metric.Figure 14: Layer height (number of layers) for the Ericsson graph set.Figure 14 is interesting mainly to show the similarity between the LP solution and thelongest path heuristic. The latter guarantees the lowest height possible, which in itselfcan be very valuable and makes for a more condensed graph with several vertices in thesame layer. This does not in general imply the lowest total dummy vertices, however. Thetwo are obviously correlated and seem to be so at a high degree with these test graphs.Looking at the averaged results from the North DAG tests in table 5 however, we see asmall diﬀerence.5.3Vertex orderingThe sole purpose of vertex ordering is to minimise edge crossings and therefore that is ouronly measurement. It might be considered one of the most important measurements forgraph drawing. In order to permit some degree of comparison of an algorithm’s perfor-mance in this regard on diﬀerent graphs, we have calculated the crossing number of eachgraph involved. This number shows the minimum amount of crossings possible. How-ever, one should note that it is not always possible for an ordering algorithm to meet thisnumber since it depends on the layer assignment and cycle removal steps.When benchmarking the number of crossings we could unfortunately not run all combi-nations with the LP formulation on graphs F8 and F9 since they were apparently too bigor complex for our formulation to compute in a reasonable time; this is further discussedin section 4.3.2. A single combination could take over two days and considering that wewould need to run it with all combinations we simply did not have the time to run themall through; we made an exception for the pure LP combination. The rest of the graphsdid not pose this problem.32
5.3Vertex ordering5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONSFigure 15: Number of crossings for the Ericsson graph set.As you can see in ﬁgure 15 the transpose method (used in MT and BT) introduced byGansner et al. [3] is a very eﬀective addition and also quite close to the optimal solutionoﬀered by LP on some of the graphs. However, it is nowhere near optimal in the caseof F9 as seen in table 3 where F9 has a crossing number of 5 while the best achievedby us is 14. The barycenter and median methods perform very similarly both with andwithout transpose. It is also very interesting to note how big of a diﬀerence there can bein the number of crossings depending on which algorithms are used, like in F8 where theminimum is 7 and the maximum is well above 200.File|V ||E|Crossing numberBest achievedXLPMTBTMBF17130000000F2727444442027F3103311261213123340F414240000222F51538021211410F617290000012F722410000000F82253317-795560F92258523-17146877Table 3: Crossing number for the ﬁles.In table 3 we can see the crossing number for each ﬁle and the best achieved results foreach algorithm. One must ﬁrst note that the crossing number is not always possible toachieve in our case since it also depends on the previous steps, cycle removal and layerassignment. However, we do come quite close on most of the ﬁles. We can easily seethat the pure LP solution never performs better than the best heuristic. This is becauseits previous steps, although optimal in their own formulations, does not look ahead to33
5.4Coordinate assignment5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONSconsider crossings.5.4Coordinate assignmentCoordinate assignment aims to place vertices as close to its connected vertices as possiblewhile also trying to straighten long edges as much as possible. Because of this we focusour measurements on the bends of edges, both the number of them and their angles. It isalso interesting to look at the area of the ﬁnal drawing.Figure 16: Number of bends for the Ericsson graph set.To count bends we have iterated over all dummy vertices and compared the x-coordinatesof their connected vertices. If they are not equal in a certain small interval ϵ then thedummy vertex is counted as a bend. A high number of bends may indicate that the graphhas many jagged edges and thus could be hard to read. However, by not knowing theangles of the bends we cannot draw any clear conclusions. Interestingly, the LP solution,both when run on the Ericsson’s and North DAGs’ graphs, always gets the smallest amountof bends (see ﬁgure 16 and table 7) though it seeks only to minimise diﬀerences in vertexx-coordinates (admittedly, the two are correlated).The average for edge angles is in some ways a better measurement than the amount ofbends since it takes all bends into account and also gives us the average angle, which cantell us more about how jagged the majority of the edges are. One should take note herethat this average not only considers angles of bends but also those of dummy vertices thatare not bent (near straight edges) and therefore the average might be lower than the realaverage of the bend angles. The same reasoning about LP for the number of bends ﬁtshere also; the LP solutions tries to minimise the diﬀerence between connected vertices,especially dummy vertices, and in the process seems to achieve a good number also foraverage edge angles.As you can see in ﬁgure 18 the priority method tends to have a quite big area. Whenlooking at the raw data of height and width we can clearly see that it is the width that34
5.4Coordinate assignment5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONSFigure 17: Average angle of edges for the Ericsson graph set.Figure 18: Area of ﬁnal drawing for the Ericsson graph set.becomes too large. Actually, the height is the same for the two algorithms since it istrivially computed beforehand. The reason for the priority methods widening is its layer-by-layer concept. After computing a layer it becomes locked for the next layer (we onlycompute coordinates for the current layer in each step) which means that the currentlayer can be skewed to the side because of the inability to edit the previous layer. If thishappens to several layers, which seems to happen frequently, then we get a lot of skewingand thus a wide drawing.35
5.5Relations between subproblems5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONSWe can easily see that the LP solution wins for all criteria in this subproblem, but it isimportant to note that if the algorithms had performed more evenly or won half of thecriteria each then we would have no way to say which performed best overall since we donot know how to prioritise these criteria.5.5Relations between subproblemsIn order to investigate how diﬀerent steps in the framework aﬀect each other, we haveplotted two of the most interesting criteria against speciﬁc algorithms from previous steps.These criteria are the number of crossings and the number of dummy vertices.Figure 19: Number of dummy vertices for the Ericsson graph set, in relation to cycle removalalgorithms.When looking at how dummy vertices are aﬀected by the cycle removal algorithm (seeﬁgure 19) we get some mildly astonishing results. For some reason the simple heuristicoutperforms all the others (F4, F7 and F8) in some very lucky combinations. These arethe simple heuristic coupled with either the LP solution or the longest path solution,where LP was a little bit better. This is very interesting results since earlier (section 5.1)the results pointed towards the simple heuristic being quite bad. But as it seems it canin some cases actually create better solutions for subsequent steps than the optimal LPsolution for cycle removal when it comes to dummy vertices.Figure 20 shows the number of crossings for each cycle removal algorithm. Here the depth-ﬁrst search heuristic performs consistently better than the others, though not by a largemargin.Taking crossings against the layer assignment algorithms in ﬁgure 21, we see that the LPsolution outmatches the others in some cases with longest path coming in a quite closesecond. Many of the graphs show very similar results, however.From all these diagrams we can see hints that there are relations between the diﬀerent36
5.5Relations between subproblems5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONSFigure 20: Number of crossings for the Ericsson graph set, in relation to cycle removalalgorithms.Figure 21: Number of crossings for the Ericsson graph set, in relation to layer assignmentalgorithms.steps of the Sugiyama framework that are not caught in our criteria. Perhaps there issome yet unknown criteria or property, whether of the graphs or the algorithms, that cantell us how and why these steps interfere with each other. In our investigation we havenot seen any research covering this question.Unfortunately, we can’t pick any winners from these results.In order to pick a bestcombination one would have to assign weights to these criteria so as to be able to consider37
5.5Relations between subproblems5EVALUATION OF IMPLEMENTATIONSall of them. We have not come up with any good way of assigning these weights and wehave not seen any research on this problem. However, we can see that the algorithms thatdot use, that is, depth-ﬁrst search for cycle removal, LP for layer assignment, median withtranspose for ordering, seems to performs well and thus is adequate to use for the pluginthat was developed. For coordinate assignment however dot uses its own quite complexheuristic which is not investigated here.38
6CONCLUSION6ConclusionA tool for visualising state machines was developed for use by Ericsson software engineers.It needed to create good layouts of state diagrams; this prompted the investigation ofexisting graph layout methods. The Sugiyama framework was chosen, and because of themany variations possible within it, a more thorough investigation was done in order topossibly ﬁnd one that was particularly suited to the graphs as deﬁned by Ericsson statemachines.The four steps of the Sugiyama framework were implemented with some popular ap-proaches from the ﬁeld of graph layout research. These approaches were then benchmarkedand compared against each other to ﬁnd a suitable solution to the problem of visualisingstate machines. A major focus was to look at how diﬀerent steps interfere with each otherto impact the ﬁnal drawing, making it necessary to not only look at the individual stepsbut also at the combinations of all steps.For cycle removal algorithms, we saw that heuristics can easily compete against and quitenearly match an exact solution, while being considerably simpler to implement and havinglinear time complexity.For layer assignment, an exact solution using LP is feasible since the problem is eﬃcientlysolvable using the simplex method. Coﬀman-Graham’s algorithm did not perform wellin our tests and is unsuited for our purposes.A longest path heuristic however faresreasonably well.For vertex ordering, however, an LP solution is not reasonable, taking days to completein some cases. Looking at the barycenter and median heuristics there is no clear winner,but adding the transpose heuristic to either is greatly beneﬁcial.For coordinate assignment, an LP solution is feasible for our purposes, being eﬃcientlysolvable similarly to layer assignment. It is preferred above the priority method, whoseperformance in our tests was comparatively bad.Finally, we showed how heuristics can perform better than an optimal solution whenlooking at the subsequent steps. This opens up to a new approach to solving the Sugiyamaframework’s subproblems; looking at combinations of solutions might be more eﬃcientthan simply picking the best for each step. Also, this might mean that there is someother kind of property or criteria of the graph which has not been studied here that wouldhighlight why a speciﬁc algorithm makes subsequent algorithms perform better.These results did not show that there existed a combination of algorithms that clearlyoutperformed the implementation in the dot tool. This, coupled with the facts that areliance on additional software turned out to not be an issue for the deployment of ourplugin and that dot contained some functionality that, due to time constraints, was notimplemented by us, motivated the use of dot in the ﬁnal product.6.1Future workAs mentioned in section 5.5 we suspect there might be some yet unknown property orcriteria of the graph that can tell how a solution to one subproblem eﬀects another. Wesuggest that this is studied further since ﬁnding a property like that might make it possibleto create much better layout algorithms.39
6.1Future work6CONCLUSIONIt would also be possible to extend the investigation by implementing more algorithms andadding them to our test framework. For example, adding a network simplex solution to thelayer assignment equation (as used by Gansner et al. [3]) or a ﬁxed-parameter algorithmfor cycle removal as shown in Chen et al. [9].When it comes to layer assignment there is a popular addition called Promote Layering [28]that much like the transpose method for ordering augments an existing algorithm. Thiswould be interesting to test in combination with our implemented layering methods to seeif they can be improved.The vertex ordering heuristics tested here are all quite similar and it would be very inter-esting to test some heuristics that diﬀer more.The coordinate assignment step has not been studied very deeply in this thesis and there-fore it would be interesting to test some more approaches to it.The results of this thesis can be used to choose a combination of algorithms for use byEricsson to remove the dot dependency. There is some remaining work to be done beforethe drawing algorithm can be considered complete, however. Though these issues havenot been thoroughly described in the paper we list them here brieﬂy:• Better edge drawing, e.g. using splines.• Better handling of edge labels.• Drawing self-edges.• General optimisation of implemented algorithms.40
REFERENCESREFERENCESReferences[1] K. Sugiyama, S. Tagawa, and M. Toda, “Methods for visual understanding of hier-archical system structures,” Systems, Man and Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on,vol. 11, pp. 109 –125, feb. 1981.[2] R. Tamassia, Handbook of Graph Drawing and Visualization. Discrete MathematicsAnd Its Applications, Taylor and Francis, 2010.[3] E. Gansner, E. Koutsoﬁos, S. North, and K.-P. Vo, “A technique for drawing directedgraphs,” Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 19, pp. 214 –230, mar1993.[4] W. Huang, S.-H. Hong, and P. Eades, “Eﬀects of crossing angles,” in VisualizationSymposium, 2008. PaciﬁcVIS ’08. IEEE Paciﬁc, pp. 41 –46, march 2008.[5] L. Nachmanson, G. G. Robertson, and B. Lee, “Drawing graphs with glee,” in GraphDrawing, 15th International Symposium, GD 2007, Sydney, Australia, September 24-26, 2007. Revised Papers (S.-H. Hong, T. Nishizeki, and W. Quan, eds.), vol. 4875 ofLecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 389–394, Springer, 2007.[6] D. Auber, “Tulip — a huge graph visualization framework,” in Graph Drawing Soft-ware (M. J¨unger and P. Mutzel, eds.), Mathematics and Visualization, pp. 105–126,Springer Berlin Heidelberg.[7] C. Bachmaier, “A radial adaptation of the sugiyama framework for visualizing hier-archical information,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,vol. 13, pp. 583–594, May 2007.[8] R. M. Karp, “Reducibility among combinatorial problems,” in 50 Years of IntegerProgramming 1958-2008 (M. J¨unger, T. M. Liebling, D. Naddef, G. L. Nemhauser,W. R. Pulleyblank, G. Reinelt, G. Rinaldi, and L. A. Wolsey, eds.), pp. 219–241,Springer Berlin Heidelberg.[9] J. Chen, Y. Liu, S. Lu, B. O’sullivan, and I. Razgon, “A ﬁxed-parameter algorithmfor the directed feedback vertex set problem,” J. ACM, vol. 55, pp. 21:1–21:19, Nov.2008.[10] J. Pach and G. T´oth, “Graphs drawn with few crossings per edge,” Combinatorica,vol. 17, pp. 427–439.[11] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, “Crossing number is np-complete,” Siam JournalOn Algebraic And Discrete Methods, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 312–316, 1983.[12] P. Eades and N. C. Wormald, “Edge crossings in drawings of bipartite graphs,” Al-gorithmica, vol. 11, pp. 379–403.[13] T. Kamada and S. Kawai, “An algorithm for drawing general undirected graphs,”Inf. Process. Lett., vol. 31, pp. 7–15, Apr. 1989.[14] P. A. Eades, “A heuristic for graph drawing.,” in Congressus Numerantium, vol. 42,pp. 149–160, 1984.[15] R. Adams, Calculus: A Complete Course. Pearson Addison Wesley, 2006.41
REFERENCESREFERENCES[16] T. M. J. Fruchterman and E. M. Reingold, “Graph drawing by force-directed place-ment,” Softw. Pract. Exper., vol. 21, pp. 1129–1164, Nov. 1991.[17] J. Matouˇsek and B. G¨artner, Understanding and Using Linear Programming (Uni-versitext). Secaucus, NJ, USA: Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 2006.[18] B. Berger and P. W. Shor, “Approximation algorithms for the maximum acyclicsubgraph problem,” in Proceedings of the ﬁrst annual ACM-SIAM symposium onDiscrete algorithms, SODA ’90, (Philadelphia, PA, USA), pp. 236–243, Society forIndustrial and Applied Mathematics, 1990.[19] P. Eades, X. Lin, and W. Smyth, “A fast and eﬀective heuristic for the feedback arcset problem,” Information Processing Letters, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 319 – 323, 1993.[20] O. Bastert and C. Matuszewski, “Layered drawings of digraphs,” in Drawing Graphs(M. Kaufmann and D. Wagner, eds.), vol. 2025 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,pp. 87–120, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.[21] R. Kaas, “A branch and bound algorithm for the acyclic subgraph problem,” EuropeanJournal of Operational Research, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 355 – 362, 1981.[22] D. B. Johnson, “Finding all the elementary circuits of a directed graph,” SIAMJournal on Computing, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 77–84, 1975.[23] E. G. C. Jr. and R. L. Graham, “Optimal scheduling for two-processor systems.,”Acta Inf., vol. 1, pp. 200–213, 1972.[24] J. La Poutr´e and J. van Leeuwen, “Maintenance of transitive closures and transitivereductions of graphs,” in Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science (H. G¨ottlerand H.-J. Schneider, eds.), vol. 314 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 106–120, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg.[25] P. Eades and K. Sugiyama, “How to draw a directed graph,” J. Inf. Process., vol. 13,pp. 424–437, Apr. 1991.[26] M. J¨unger, E. Lee, P. Mutzel, and T. Odenthal, “A polyhedral approach to themulti-layer crossing minimization problem,” in Graph Drawing (G. DiBattista, ed.),vol. 1353 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 13–24, Springer Berlin / Heidel-berg.[27] K. Sugiyama, Graph Drawing and Applications for Software and Knowledge Engi-neers. Series on Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, World Scientiﬁc,2002.[28] N. S. Nikolov and A. Tarassov, “Graph layering by promotion of nodes,” DiscreteApplied Mathematics, vol. 154, no. 5, pp. 848 – 860, 2006.42
AADDITIONAL BENCHMARK DATAAAdditional benchmark dataHere we show tables of normalised data for the diﬀerent criteria for both the Ericsson andNorth DAG graph sets.Graph set1st2nd3rd4thEricssonLP 0.827G 0.836D 0.988S 1.348North DAG’sLP 0.539G 0.611D 0.895S 1.953Table 4: Normalised average of cycles removed for both graph sets.Graph setMeasurement1st2nd3rd4thEricssonDummy verticesLP 0.661L 0.792CS 1.127C2 1.326North DAGsDummy verticesLP 0.461L 0.657CS 1.232C2 1.649EricssonLayer heightL 0.945LP 0.945CS 0.994C2 1.116North DAGsLayer heightL 0.877LP 0.888CS 1.007C2 1.225Table 5: Normalised average of layering measurements for both graph sets.Graph set1st2nd3rd4th5thEricssonLP 0.245BT 0.458MT 0.470M 1.749B 1.917North DAGsLP 0.300MT 0.515BT 0.528M 1.794B 1.860Table 6: Normalised average of crossings for both graph sets.Graph setMeasurement1st2ndEricssonBendsLP 0.884P 1.115North DAGsBendsLP 0.917P 1.082EricssonAverage anglesLP 0.741P 0.755North DAGsAverage anglesLP 0.643P 1.356EricssonMax anglesLP 0.806P 1.194North DAGsMax anglesLP 0.795P 1.204EricssonAreaLP 0.460P 1.540North DAGsAreaLP 0.684P 1.315Table 7: Normalised average of coordinate measurements for both graph sets.43